 
 Chapter 2 Training Principles and Tips 
 Chapter 2 
 Training Principles and Tips 
 Eat well, rest often, and maintain a good state of hydration. 
 What type of training plan do most runners follow? Or maybe the question should be how do most runners train? Often a coach coaches as she was coached, which is not so unusual because many coaches go from being an athlete to being a coach. Some runners and coaches study psychology or biomechanics or physiology, and this provides scientific background for the practical experiences they had as athletes. Still, it is not unusual to train the way a champion athlete was coached or trained. So, copying what others have done is certainly not uncommon. The question is do runners always understand why they are doing what they are doing? 
 No question, some runners train on their own and others are given workouts by coaches, which can vary considerably and still be productive. There is probably no particular way of training that is best for every runner; however, there are certainly basic principles that can improve different bodily functions. No doubt that with enough runners on a team, just about any training system will reap positive results, even if only for part of the team involved. My concern in this case is that some who didn’t survive a particular training system may have been even better than those who did if they hadn’t been driven out of the sport by injury or a perceived lack of commitment. 
 In this chapter I will present several topics on training and technique development, including eight significant training principles, how to develop a training plan, proper stride mechanics, and the importance of breathing rhythms. It is always important to understand how each training component adds to the entire training program and overall fitness. 
 EXTREME APPROACHES TO TRAINING 
 As a modern pentathlete, the first running coach I ever had was our fencing master; he was a great fencing master, but he was not very skilled at coaching runners. As a newcomer to running, I did what he said and assumed it was how runners trained. 
 The first 6 weeks I ran for this coach, I ran a mile warm-up followed by 10 repeat 400s on a cinder track in spikes. Each 400 was about as hard as I could go (trying to keep up with others who knew how to run). I got a 400 jog for recovery between the harder 400s. I did this 5 days a week for 6 weeks. Now, if the purpose of this workout was to produce pain and injury, it was just right. I got such painful shins I didn’t know which foot to stand on. 
 Another negative result of this daily set of hard 400s was that no one bothered to tell me how to run a race that was 4,000 meters in distance, so knowing nothing but all-out running, that’s how I ran my 4K races—all out right at the start. Naturally, after about 800 meters I was already in a death trot for the remainder of the event. Not a really great approach. 
 We often hear about the training that great runners do and assume that is a good approach. Here is what one 17-year-old runner did one week in the spring of his junior year in high school. Sunday was a 10-mile (16 km) run in 64 minutes, and his only run on Sunday. Each of the other 6 days of every week involved a morning 4-mile (6.4 km) run and then an afternoon session on the track. This week in April I am referring to had the following afternoon workouts: 
 Monday: 9:55 2 mile + 2 × 5:15 miles + 3 × 2:28 800s + 6 × 65 sec 400s + weights and a 4-mile cool-down 
 Tuesday: 6 × 400 at 64 sec each + 10 × 140 at 18 sec each + 5 × 200 at 31 sec each 
 Wednesday: 50 × 400 at 69 sec each on a 3-minute send-off 
 Thursday: 18 × 800 at 2:45 each (why not just a 9-mile run at 5:30 per mile pace?) 
 Friday: 1 mile + 1,200 + 800 + 600 + 400 + 3 miles easy cool-down 
 Saturday: race 
 I guess this is how we should train our middle-distance runners because this runner broke several world records and made it to three Olympics. One day I asked the coach of this runner if he had others on the team who ran those 50 400s, and he said 24 of them did and one ran only 40, about whom the coach said, “I knew he was not going to be very good.” 
 Another national record holder had several 66-mile (106 km) long runs, totaled 380 miles (611 km) one week, averaged 320 miles (515 km) a week for 6 weeks, and averaged 240 miles (386 km) a week for one year. I seriously doubt many runners could do these workouts and live through them. So what is needed? I’d say we need to follow some principles of training. I present some reasonable ones here. 
 PRINCIPLES OF TRAINING 
 It is a good idea to understand how training affects your body and that different kinds of training will stress different systems. Every time you impose a specific stress, there will be immediate reactions in different parts of your body. Every time you impose that same stress, you get the same reactions, but over time there is a different reaction to a particular repeated stress, and that is the body strengthening itself. 
 The human body is very good at adapting to a variety of stresses, but it takes a fair amount of time for the body to fully react to some types of stress (e.g., it takes months for muscle fibers to fully adjust to the stress of regular running). It is important to understand different principles of training so you can take advantage of them and avoid overstressing the body with amount, intensity, or frequency of training. 
 Principle 1: The Body Reacts to Stress 
 Regardless of what running event you decide to engage in, it is worthwhile to learn a little about how the human body reacts to various types of physical stress, and believe me it does react. All you have to do to realize there is always some reaction is to go for a simple run once around the block or around the track. At the completion of your one-lap run you can easily recognize some reactions to that stress. Your heart will be beating faster, you will be breathing a little harder, and you may notice a little discomfort in some muscles in your legs. If you take your blood pressure, you will find that it has gone up a little, not to mention that blood flow has been diverted from some parts of your body to other parts to accommodate the task you undertook. Your body does a very good job of adjusting to the stresses placed on it, and you won’t even be aware of many of the adjustments made. 
 Principle 2: Specificity 
 The principle of specificity simply states that the tissues being stressed are the ones that react to that stress. If you stress your heart muscle, the heart reacts; if you stress breathing muscles, they react; and if you stress running muscles in your legs, those muscles will react. Every time you run, or even walk, some parts of your feet will also react to the stress imposed on them. 
 In addition to the relatively immediate reactions to physical stress, there is a second type of reaction. The parts of the body being stressed become stronger and better prepared to deal with any future stress, as long as the body is in a state of good health. Stress the heart muscle and the heart muscle gets stronger; stress your running muscles and they get stronger; stress the breathing muscles and they get stronger. This response occurs in all muscles, tendons, bones, and other tissues under stress. 
 Principle 3: Overstress 
 More stress leads to more adaptation, but another training basic may also come into play here: the principle of overstress. If you overstress some body parts, they may not get tougher; in fact, they may get weaker or break down completely. This brings up a very important part of the equation. When does the body accomplish the strengthening part of the stress reaction? It is during the recovery, or rest time, between bouts of stress that the strengthening takes place. 
 Rest and recovery are a vital part of a training program, not an attempt to avoid training. There may actually be times when you will benefit more from rest than from going out for another run, and sometimes doing a less stressful workout will produce more benefits than will a harder session. An approach I suggest for runners is that whenever you are not sure which of two training sessions to take on at any particular time, select the less stressful of the two. You are admitting you aren’t sure which would be better, so why not eliminate the more demanding one? An example is deciding whether to do a solid set of interval 1,000-meter runs or a not-so-demanding fartlek session; the weather is not desirable, including some heavy winds. Doing the 1,000s will probably be slower than desired because of the wind, and that can be a bit discouraging. On the other hand, the fartlek session will not involve trying to hit particular times for specific distances, and the overall benefit of the session may be as good as having done the repeat 1,000s for time. 
 Success in running relies on being able to make adaptations when necessary, particularly when it comes to coaching a team of young runners. For example, let’s say a coach says, based on the fact that his star runner, Bob, has done a similar workout before, “Today I want you all to run eight repeat 400s in 75 seconds each with a 400-meter jog for recovery. If you want to run as well as Bob, you need to train like Bob.” So the group goes out in 75 for the first 400, and as time goes by, Bob keeps running 75s, but some of the group can’t hold that pace and struggle to run 78, 80, or slower for some of their 400s. Soon enough, those who can’t keep up are struggling to run as hard as they can and are not getting as much recovery time between the faster 400s, and technique goes out the window. 
 What is the purpose of this workout? Probably to develop speed and economy, but if most in the group are struggling with poor technique, good economy is not being practiced, and speed is not developed if the pace keeps getting slower. So who benefits from the workout? Bob is the only one who benefits; all the others are just getting negative feedback as to how well they are progressing. 
 Coaches and runners must be able to make adjustments to accommodate each athlete who is there to work out. You never know when the slowest person on the team may eventually become the best, but it will never happen if he is discouraged and quits before he realizes his potential or, worse, is run into the ground and injured so he is not able to run at all. 
 I feel confident saying that the United States never sends its top runners to any Olympic Games because some of the best are hurt when it comes time to pick the team. As far as coaching a cross country team, I would personally rather have my top seven runners all healthy and a little below their capability than to have three of them in peak shape and the other four injured and not even able to start the championship race. It does not make sense to always strive to produce the top athlete if that ruins the lives of others who might have eventually become great. What produces the best result is to have each member of a team performing at her best, regardless of where on the team each member is ranked. 
 Reducing stress, be it physical or psychological in nature, is desirable going into championship events. I have mentioned many times in writings and talks how Tom Von Ruden, a good friend of mine, asked for my advice when he was training for the final Olympic trials in South Lake Tahoe in 1968. He told me he was not feeling as ready as he would like to be in the final few weeks leading up to the trials, and he wondered what I thought he should do. Who knows if I gave the best answer, but I told him to leave the training camp and go up to Leadville, Colorado, where he could be by himself for the final couple of weeks before the trials. He took that advice and, somewhat unexpectedly, made the U.S. team. He followed that with a ninth-place finish in the Olympic 1,500. Maybe it was just a matter of reducing psychological stress, but it certainly paid off. 
 Though modestly sized for an elite runner, Tom Von Ruden (bib 99) earned respect from the best runners in the world, whom he often challenged and beat, through his dedication to training and competitive spirit. 
 Principle 4: Training Response 
 Figure 2.1 shows how the body tends to respond to a new stress. Let’s say you are starting a training program. You are not in great shape but are capable of running 30 minutes or so during any training session, and you can run repeated 1-mile runs at 8:00 minutes each without undue stress. Also, let’s say your current level of fitness at the start of training (which is more stressful than what you have been doing) is the one depicted in figure 2.1 . So you start a program that involves running three 1-mile runs at 8:00 each, with 10 minutes of rest in between. Also, let’s say you do this training session on 3 days of each week. Because this new training program is more demanding than what you have been doing, you rise to a new level of fitness. 
 Figure 2.1     Increased fitness as a response to a new level of training stress. 
 The benefit of this new training stress diminishes as time goes by, however, and eventually, if you just continue doing the same training week after week, your new fitness level will no longer improve. If, after attaining the benefits of this training program, which typically takes about 6 to 8 weeks, you want to reach a higher level of fitness, the training stress needs to be increased again. There are times when some runners will want to hit a steady state of fitness and not increase the stress until later in the year or when a new competitive season is fast approaching, but when a new level of fitness is desired, the training stress has to increase. 
 In the sport of running, there are several ways to achieve an increase in stress. Look back at the program you started following in our example—3 × 1 mile at 8:00 with 10-minute rests, performed 3 days each week. There are four variables in this program: 
 Workload , or total amount of work being accomplished, which is 3 miles in this case 
 Intensity factor , which is a speed of 8:00 for each mile 
 Recovery , which is 10 minutes after each 8-minute mile being run 
 Frequency , which in this program is three times each week 
 All training sessions have at least three of these four components: workload, intensity, and frequency. Steady runs (i.e., long comfortable runs) don’t have the recovery factor because the workout involves a single bout of running. When you feel the need to increase the stress level of the training program in figure 2.1 , you have all four components to work with: 
 You could increase the workload by increasing the number of 1-mile runs to four, or some number more than three, and leaving the other ingredients as they are. 
 You could leave the workload at 3 miles and increase intensity to 7:40 per mile. 
 You could keep load and intensity as is and reduce the recovery time between runs to 5 minutes. 
 You could leave load, intensity, and recovery as they are and just increase frequency to 4 or 5 days each week. 
 Figure 2.2     Increased fitness as a response to new levels of training stress added to prior training stresses. 
 It is not a good idea to change more than one of the training variables. A lot depends on the total mileage currently achieved; the number of repeats of a particular training distance in a training session should be a function of weekly mileage. If a runner has a stable weekly mileage, the number of repeats usually will not be changed; more likely the speed of the repeated runs will be increased and recovery time held similar to what it was earlier. Making any of the ingredients of the training session more stressful will usually result in the body moving up to a new level of fitness, and the manner in which this improved fitness is achieved is similar to how the first improvement was achieved—relatively rapidly at first and then tapering off over a period of weeks. Figure 2.2 shows how new levels of fitness are attained (or maybe not attained). 
 Principle 5: Personal Limits 
 Sometimes an increase in training stress may not result in improved fitness, and in figure 2.2 I have put a question mark after the third level of improved fitness, suggesting that imposing a third new stress may not bring about an increase in fitness. This doesn’t mean a person has reached optimal fitness, but it does indicate that another principle of training is coming into play here, namely that everyone has limits. By no means does this imply that anyone ever reaches her absolute limits, but it certainly does suggest that everyone has seasonal limits. By seasonal limits I mean limits that are imposed on a person because of a lifestyle at any given time. 
 The principle that everyone has limits is most noticeable during college years because of the variations that occur in class schedules. For example, during one term of study a student may have a class at 8:00 a.m. every day of the week, have classes until 2:00 every afternoon, and attend two labs from 2:15 to 5:15 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays. The labs may even prevent the runner from attending practice on Tuesdays and Thursdays, and training may have to be done alone. Now, the very next college term this same runner may not have a class until 10:00 a.m. any day of the week and may not have any labs, with the final class of the day ending at 2:00 p.m. This certainly is a better schedule for training, with sufficient time for morning runs and also plenty of time in the afternoons. 
 Even for runners who are not in college, the demands of daily life can vary from one season of the year to the next. The demands at work, at home, and of other things going on at different periods in a person’s life make training more or less difficult. 
 Something that should definitely be avoided is overtraining, and the best way to prevent this negative scenario is to have constant runner–coach interaction. Training intensities should be determined by current fitness, which is best measured by race performances. With this in mind, my standard answer to a runner who thinks his training needs to be speeded up is “Prove to me in a race that you are ready to train faster.” Of course, when a runner has been training at a specific intensity for 4 to 6 weeks without feeling any increase in stress, then, without a race to go by, training can be increased slightly in intensity. 
 I have designed a brief stress table that some runners find useful for tracking life issues ( table 2.1 ). Keeping track of different aspects of daily life can often help athletes and coaches decide what daily activities and stresses are associated with good and bad performances, or even what is associated with variations in how training, or life in general, is going. 
 In arriving at scores for each item in table 2.1 , consider the following: 
 How desirable was last night’s sleep? 
 Do you have an injury, an illness, or unusual pains? 
 How well do you think you recovered from yesterday’s training? 
 How is your flexibility? 
 Rate the previous 24 hours of rest, energy, and nutrition. 
 Rate the physical stress of today’s training session. 
 How stressful was today, relative to your general mental and emotional state? 
 Add any category you would like to include in your daily evaluations. 
 Principle 6: Diminishing Return 
 Two other principles of training often associated with each other are the principle of diminishing return and the principle of accelerating setbacks, both of which are depicted in figure 2.3 . 
 Let’s first examine the principle of diminishing return. Here we are looking at how fitness improves over time. In this case, time may be years of training, not just several weeks. When you start training, the benefits are rather substantial relative to the effort put forth. The fitter you get, the less benefit you get from training harder, which is quite logical if you think about it. 
 Figure 2.3     Comparison of an increase in fitness level caused by training with the chance of a setback caused by the increased stress from training. 
 For example, as a beginner you may improve your time for a 1-mile race from 6:10 to 5:40 without training very hard, but a 30-second improvement from 5:40 to 5:10 will probably be a bit tougher, and improving from 4:30 to 4:00 will certainly take a lot more work than it took to get from 6:10 to 5:40. 
 Just imagine how much harder you would need to train to improve your marathon time by 1 minute if you are currently running 2:08 than it would take to improve 4 minutes, from 3 hours to 2:56. Again, the fitter you become, the less benefit you get from training harder. Here’s another (and more appealing) way to put it: The worse your state of fitness, the more benefit you will reap from training moderately, which is reassuring when you have lost fitness because of illness or injury. 
 Principle 7: Accelerating Setbacks 
 Now that we have looked at the diminishing return curve, let’s look at the accelerating setback curve, represented by the dashed line in figure 2.3 . This curve shows that when you are not training very hard, there is less chance of encountering a setback through injury or lack of interest; but at some point in the training process, as the stress of training increases in intensity, the chance of a setback starts to increase rather rapidly. 
 When you consider these two responses to training, most of your training must be in the gray shading shown in figure 2.3 . Within this ideal intensity zone, there are substantial benefits and relatively minimal chances of being sidetracked by setbacks. 
 Bear in mind that it is not possible to assign any particular amount of stress to this window because that will vary based on training experience. For example, for one runner this desirable window of training stress may be 30 miles (48 km) per week, and for another runner it may be 120 miles (193 km) per week. What constitutes a proper amount of training depends a great deal on years of experience and body design, not to mention time available and commitment to being a successful runner. 
 Principle 8: Maintenance 
 The last principle of training is the maintenance principle, which states that it is easier to maintain a level of fitness than it was to achieve that fitness. Part of this is a psychological matter because it is typically easier for a runner to repeat a particular performance than it was to achieve that same performance in the first place. 
 For example, if you have been working for some time to race a 5-minute mile, and you finally make it happen, it won’t be as hard to do it again as it was to do it the first time. Physiologically, you have increased your fitness level a notch as well. Your heart has gotten stronger, more blood vessels have opened up to the running muscles, and the muscle cells themselves have become more efficient in converting fuel into energy. 
 Another example of how maintaining fitness is not as hard as it was to achieve it is seen when you taper for races. During a taper, you back off some on the training stress and achieve better race results. Being able to maintain, or even improve, fitness while reducing stress certainly supports the maintenance principle. 
 The maintenance principle is particularly important when planning a long-term training program because it allows you to shift from emphasizing one type of training to another while still maintaining the benefits of the previous workouts. For example, you may have been concentrating on interval training for some weeks and then switched over to more threshold work and a little less of the interval-type training. The maintenance principle allows you to keep the benefits you gained from the interval work as you begin to reap the benefits of threshold training. To help maintain, it is okay to include some, but less, of the earlier training. 
 It is also possible to see the maintenance principle at work when a student has time off between cross country and track seasons. During this time off from running, an athlete may do supplemental training or may even play a little basketball or other sport, and the stresses imposed on different parts of the body can help maintain some conditioning that the earlier running produced. This is of particular importance for runners who take time off for injury, for illness, or just to take a break from daily running. 
 TRAINING PLAN DEVELOPMENT 
 In discussing these important principles of training, I have shown that there is no one specific route to success as a runner. Some runners respond better to one type of training than do others, some are slow to respond to the same training that others respond to quickly, and it is certainly a good idea to expose all runners to various approaches during a season of training. You must always be open to trying different types of training and to arranging training in different orders of importance throughout a season, but at all times you should be able to answer the question “What is the purpose of this workout?” 
 Several years ago I was asked by some high school coaches how to best deal with their teams’ racing schedule (every Tuesday and every Saturday throughout cross country season). The question was, “If we have to race Tuesday and Saturday every week, when can we train?” My response was twofold. 
 First, realize that races are a serious part of training and that there are definite physiological and psychological benefits achieved from racing. In addition, when running a 4,000- to 5,000-meter race twice a week, there is little, if any, need for interval training during this time. In other words, a race that lasts 15 to 20 minutes is just about the optimal physiological stress on those systems of the body that are taxed during an interval session. 
 Second, it might be best to do a workout on Wednesday each week, the day after that midweek race. This has worked out so well over the years that I often used that approach with collegiate runners. Not that I had a Tuesday race each week, but we would often train hard Tuesday and come back Wednesday for another quality workout. It is true that the muscular discomfort associated with a hard session is realized more about 48 hours after the stress than it is 24 hours afterward. Therefore, a Wednesday quality session can often be performed quite well and even better than it might have been if put off until Thursday. 
 Here are additional benefits to scheduling back-to-back training days on Tuesday and Wednesday. First, this means you have 2 easy days before any Saturday races and 2 easy days after a Saturday race before the next Tuesday race or training session. Second, some runners like to run quality sessions faster than I have asked them to run, and this back-to-back schedule often solves this problem. For example, if I say, “Tuesday you are to run six 1,000-meter runs at 3:20 each, with 3-minute recoveries,” they are less likely to try running them in 3:15 (too fast) if I also add, “and tomorrow you will be running six 1-mile runs at 5:44 with 1-minute rests between.” Knowing another quality session is coming tomorrow tends to put a damper on overtraining on the first of the 2 back-to-back days. Third, when you get into track season, you may attend 2-day meets in which you have to race on 2 consecutive days, and your back-to-back training sessions will have prepared you for this. 
 Understanding the principles of training helps you minimize the possibility of overtraining while letting you take full advantage of the work you are doing. Remember to always try to achieve the greatest possible benefit from the least amount of training rather than getting the greatest possible benefit from the hardest training possible. 
 When increasing the training stress, always stay at a chosen degree of stress for 6 to 8 weeks before making changes. It is a mistake to try to make each week of training, or each specific workout, better than the previous week or the last time you did that specific workout. I would much rather have my runners come to me saying a particular workout is starting to feel too easy than for them to be struggling to go a little faster each time they train. 
 Training is not always fun, but it should be rewarding, so don’t overdo it. Coaches and athletes should be conservative when increasing the training stress. I let race performances tell me when it is time to increase the stress of training rather than increasing the stress level too often in hopes of a performance improvement. 
 The following are not necessarily principles of training but topics of particular importance that might fit into a talk of training principles: how you stride over the ground and how you breathe when running. 
 STRIDE RATE 
 During the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles, my wife and I spent every day of the running events counting different runners’ stride frequency, often several times for the same runner, during prelims and finals and also early and late in the same race. In all, we examined about 50 runners, both male and female and in events from the 800 to the marathon. 
 Of all the runners tested, only one took fewer than 180 steps per minute. Turnover was well over 200 per minute in the 800 and sometimes in the 1,500, but from the 3,000 (a women’s event in the 1984 Olympics) through the marathon, the rate was quite similar and only stride length was reduced as the race became longer. 
 I tested one Olympic gold medalist in the marathon. At a 7-minute-per-mile pace, the rate was 184; at a 6-minute pace, it moved up to 186; and at a 5-minute pace, it moved up to 190. This represented a much greater increase in running speed than the increase in rate. It is quite clear that runners seem most comfortable with a particular rhythm, and that rhythm varies little as they change stride length to increase speed during different races. 
 180 Steps per Minute 
 One reason I strongly emphasize trying to run with a stride rate around 180 steps per minute is to minimize the landing shock associated with running. Keep in mind that the slower the leg turnover, the more time you are spending in the air; the more time you spend in the air, the higher you are elevating your body mass; and the higher you elevate your body mass, the harder you hit the ground on the next landing. Believe me, it is during the impact associated with hitting the ground that many little injuries occur. 
 So, how do you minimize landing shock when running? A simple way of explaining it is to pretend you are rolling over the ground rather than bounding from foot to foot. Try to avoid placing each foot out in front of yourself, which often acts as a braking action, increasing the impact force as you go from one foot to the other. Try to have your feet land closer back, toward your center of gravity, so your body is floating (or rolling) over your feet. 
 Foot Strike 
 Another issue is what part of your feet hit the ground first (i.e., where is your foot strike?). Where you strike the ground (relative to your center of gravity) is one concern, and another is how your feet strike the ground. 
 Foot strike tends to vary, not only among runners but also depending on the event for which you are training. It is most common for those racing in short events (e.g., sprinters and even some middle-distance runners) to hit the ground on the balls of their feet, almost as if they were running on their toes. On the other hand, many longer-distance runners, which certainly includes those who are running a marathon, tend to strike the ground with a heel-first landing or, in some cases, a midfoot landing. 
 From my years of testing many runners of all ability levels, it has become apparent that some people are more comfortable using a certain type of foot strike. Runners who are relatively new to the sport should experiment with different foot-strike techniques and use the one that is most comfortable, that is the least fatiguing, and that allows for a light and quick turnover rate of about 180 steps per minute. 
 In particular, if you are experiencing calf or shin discomfort, try to concentrate on a mid- or rear-foot landing technique for a few weeks and see if that solves your problem. Very often, just focusing on taking 180 steps each minute will result in the foot strike that suits you best. 
 One final thought about foot strike is to try to avoid turning your toes outward as you land. Have someone watch you from the front as you run toward them, checking to see if your feet are striking the ground with the toes pointing straight forward rather than to the side. A turned-out foot on landing often leads to shin pain along the inside of the lower leg. 
 Go for 180 steps a minute and learn to roll over the ground with as little effort as possible, and running should be much more enjoyable and leave you more injury free. I sometimes tell runners they should imagine they are running over a field of raw eggs and their goal is to not break any of them; be light on your feet and comfortable in your landing. And one final note—don’t count each foot when counting stride rate; just count the right (or left) foot and look for 90 (assuming, of course, that you take as many steps with the left as you do with your right). 
 One of the finest and most accomplished female runners of all time, “Catherine the Great” Ndereba is seen here with her breathing under control and in stride just prior to heel strike. 
 BREATHING WHILE RUNNING 
 It is important to understand your breathing and how it should feel when running. People who have asthma or other breathing-related issues need to discuss their ventilation problems with their doctor so they are doing the best they can to eliminate stressful situations relative to their breathing. 
 In normal atmospheric conditions, the breathing discomfort that is sometimes associated with exercising (specifically, running) hard is not due to a lack of oxygen (O 2 ) in your lungs. The feeling of wanting to breathe harder is caused by an increase in the amount of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) in your lungs. In normal air (i.e., in a building or outside in open air), there is very little CO 2 . In fact only about .04 percent of normal air is CO 2 . 
 Impact of CO 2 
 In your lungs, because your blood is always delivering CO 2 from functioning tissues throughout your body, there is a much greater fraction of this gas compared with how much is in the air you breathe in. In fact, at any given time, even during rest, the air in your lungs is about 4 percent or even 5 percent CO 2 . You feel quite comfortable when your lungs contain this much CO 2 , but when you start exercising, the muscles you use while running produce much more CO 2 than when at rest, so the fraction of this waste product of exercise is increased. 
 When your body senses an increase above the normal 4 or 5 percent, you breathe harder to get rid of the excess CO 2 . So it is the increase in this gas, not a drop in the amount of O 2 , that stimulates you to breathe harder. In fact, you always have plenty of O 2 as long as you are breathing normal air. 
 An extreme example of how the buildup of CO 2 increases the desire to breathe is when you hold your breath to see how far you can swim underwater. That intense desire to inhale a good breath of fresh air is the increase in CO 2 that results from not breathing; it is not due to a lack of O 2 . In fact, if you were to reach a state of insufficient O 2 , you would pass out because not enough O 2 is being delivered to the brain. We are quite fortunate that the increase in CO 2 drives us to breathe before the lack of O 2 results in our passing out. 
 So how does this all relate to breathing while running? Well, the harder you run, the faster you deliver CO 2 to the lungs, and that increase in CO 2 drives you to breathe harder to reduce the concentration of that gas in your lungs, which, of course, also helps you stay well above the concentration of O 2 needed for the work being done. 
 Breathing Rhythms 
 The total amount of air that you breathe each minute is the product of the size and number of breaths you take each minute. As you start to run, you usually increase both the size and number of breaths, but the rate at which you breathe is typically in rhythm with your stride rate. 
 When not running very hard, you may breathe in for three steps and breathe out for three steps, and you may stay with this rate even when you feel the need to breathe harder by just increasing the size of each breath. When running a little harder, you feel the need to ventilate even more, so you switch to a faster breathing rhythm; for runners this is usually by taking two steps while breathing in and two steps while breathing out (referred to as a 2-2 breathing rhythm). 
 Most accomplished runners breathe with a 2-2 rhythm, especially when running fairly hard, because it is comfortable and allows a siz able amount of air to be breathed in and out of the lungs. I strongly recommend using a 2-2 rhythm during practice and in competition, at least during the first two-thirds of middle-distance races, as I explain later in the chapter. You may be able to breathe at a slower rate when running slowly, but it is usually better to use that good 2-2 rhythm even in easy runs, and in threshold, interval, and repetition workouts, so it becomes natural. 
 When considering the rate at which you breathe, you must understand that the important aspect of breathing is to ventilate the lungs with fresh air. Let’s take, for example, a few different situations. If you breathe with a 4-4 rhythm, you will certainly move a large amount of air into your lungs with each breath you take, but this 4-4 rhythm means you are taking only about 22 breaths per minute (180 steps per minute divided by 8 steps per breathing cycle means you are taking 22.5 breaths per minute). Let’s say you are moving 4 liters of air in and out with each breath; this means you are moving 90 liters of air in and out of your lungs per minute, and believe me, if working hard, that is not very much. 
 Now, let’s go to a 3-3 rhythm, which may reduce the amount of each breath to 3.5 liters per breath, which means you are now moving 3.5 liters in and out, 30 times per minute, and 30 × 3.5 = 105 liters per minute, 16 percent more air per minute. Now, let’s try a 2-2 breathing rhythm, which will give you 45 breaths per minute and about 3 liters per breath. In this case you move 135 liters of air per minute (3 × 45 = 135), which is doing a better job of ventilating the lungs, reducing CO 2 buildup, and increasing the O 2 content of the air in your lungs. 
 We can go one step further and try a 1-1 breathing rhythm (something you often hear novice runners doing at the end of a hard race). With this rate of breathing, the size of each breath will be greatly reduced, and the total amount of air moved in and out may not even be as much as can be accomplished with a slower yet deeper rate. In addition, realize that a portion of each breath you move through your mouth and nose is dead-space air, the air that does not reach the lungs for gas exchange. The faster the breathing rate, the greater the portion of each breath and of each minute that is not involved in O 2 and CO 2 exchange. 
 Obviously, faster breathing rates are a little more costly in terms of energy expenditure of the breathing muscles, but at some point, the ventilation factor, along with the cost factor, usually ends up favoring a breathing rhythm of somewhere around a 2-2 (or 2-1) rhythm. Taking three steps per breathing cycle using a 2-1 rhythm gives you 60 breaths per minute (1 each second). This probably allows for the greatest amount of air to be moved per minute while running, but it is usually not necessary until you are working very hard, such as in the last part of a 5K or 10K race. Of all the elite runners I have tested in the lab, about 86 percent of them automatically choose a 2-2 rhythm until working at maximum, at which time they go to 2-1 or 1-2. Whether the elite runners have learned over the years that this is the most efficient approach, or whether someone has suggested this to them, it makes sense to adjust to this rhythm early in a career without having to wait for it to become the natural thing to do. 
 One way I demonstrate the effects of the different breathing rhythms to my runners is to ask them to run five laps on the track (just at moderate intensity, not racing). For the first lap they are to breathe with a 4-4 rhythm, then 3-3 for lap two, 2-2 for lap three, 1-1 for lap four, and back to 4-4 for lap five. Then I ask them which was most stressful and which was most comfortable. 
 Something that works quite well with younger runners is to have them breathe with a 2-2 rhythm for the first two-thirds of a race (e.g., first 2 miles of a 5K cross country race), then go to 2-1 or 1-2 for the final third of the race. If they can’t manage 2-2 for the first two-thirds of the race, it tells them they have gone out too fast, and next time they are to set an easier early pace. 
 How much air any particular runner moves in and out of the lungs per minute varies a great deal. Two Olympians I tested were similar in size and in performance, but during a maximum-effort test, one breathed 160 liters per minute and the other 224 liters per minute. One was breathing just over 2.6 liters per breath and the other just over 3.6 liters per breath. People definitely vary in minute ventilation and in the size of each breath. 
 One situation where a faster breathing rate is a little easier is when running at altitude. The air at altitude is less dense and offers less resistance to flowing in and out of the breathing airways. I have known at least two great runners who used a 1-1 breathing rhythm at altitude when working really hard. 
 A runner can also use the knowledge of breathing rhythm to determine how hard she is working. If you can breathe comfortably with a 3-3 rhythm during a long steady run, this means you are not working too hard, but if you feel you must breathe 2-2 to get enough air, then you are not working that easily. I am not suggesting that you use a 3-3 breathing rhythm during all easy long runs (2-2 is still probably the way to go), but giving 3-3 a try for a few minutes would tell you how hard you are working. This is similar to knowing you are going too hard during threshold running (i.e., if you can’t use a 2-2 rhythm and have to go to 2-1 or 1-2). I’m not suggesting you need to constantly monitor your breathing, but it is good to know how you can use this information during training and racing to judge the effort you are putting forth. 
 