 
 Chapter 9 Training Breaks and Supplemental Training 
 Chapter 9 
 Training Breaks and Supplemental Training 
 Make prudent decisions to benefit your body. 
 I have made a point of emphasizing that rest can be considered part of training, rather than an avoidance of training, and I want to also say there may be times when a full break from training can be beneficial. By a full break I mean ceasing running completely for an extended period (from several days to weeks or even a month or two). 
 Some breaks from training may be considerably longer than others. For example, a major injury that requires surgery can easily mean being away from running for an extended time and becoming frustrated with how training is going can also lead to a relatively long break from running. 
 In a sense, there are two categories of breaks from training—planned breaks and unplanned breaks. The main difference between these two types of breaks is that during some of the unplanned ones, you may not be able to do any running or even alternative exercises because of a particular injury or illness. In planned breaks, running is always still a possibility, as are other types of training. 
 Regardless of the reason for a break from regular training, it is not advisable to jump right back into the volume of training you were doing before the time off started. Training will have to be adjusted because there has been some loss of fitness, and always remember that when your fitness is down a little, training doesn’t have to be as hard as it was before the break to still provide benefits. In other words, don’t try to work extra hard to make up for lost time. 
 TAKING BREAKS 
 I don’t believe I have ever met a runner who hasn’t taken a break from training at some time in his or her career. You can even think of a day or two of rest from a hard training session as a break in training. Or what about tapering for an event, during which training is substantially reduced. Is that a break in training? 
 The greatest example of taking breaks when needed was a good friend of mine who was an NCAA national champion, a Pan American Games champion, and an Olympian. He also, by the way, broke 30 minutes in a 10K the year he turned 40. What is so interesting about this runner is that I tested him at age 24, and his O 2 max was a high 78.6. I also tested him 25 years later, the year he turned 50, and his O 2 max at that age was 76.0. I have never heard of someone that age with such outstanding aerobic power. 
 When I asked him how many days he thought he had taken off from training during those 25 years between tests, he said he had kept track of every day he took off, and they totaled more than 1,200 days. He basically took a few days off every time he had a little injury or illness, and it clearly didn’t hurt him any to take that many breaks in training over the years. 
 In addition, this great runner hardly ran during the winter months; instead he did a lot of cross-country skiing, proving that supplemental training did a great job of helping him maintain fitness for running (skiing days were not considered days off from training, even though he was not running during those days). 
 This documented case is a great example of what the human body can maintain even with many little breaks. It certainly tells me that you are better off taking a few rest days in order to heal an injury than to try to work through that injury and just prolong the healing process (the same with minor illnesses, which can cause a major setback if you try to train through them). 
 Regardless of the reason for a break in training, it is always advisable to consider what is happening to the body when it is away from daily activity. Fitness will drop off, but usually not as much or as fast as expected, because many of the physiological benefits that have been earned during regular training are rather slow to go away. 
 For example, when the heart muscle, or running muscles for that matter, have increased in strength over weeks of training, the loss in muscle is slow to take place. Little changes in the muscle fibers and in the blood vessels feeding those fibers are retained for a while as well. 
 Figure 9.1 shows a simplified example of how training benefits occur over time and how those benefits are lost over time. In other words, when just starting a program, relatively little training produces sizable benefits that taper off over time; with a stop in training, the benefits are lost slowly at first, so a few days off now and then won’t have much of a negative effect, if any at all. After all, it is common to taper (back off, with more rest) for an important race, with the idea that it will produce a better-than-usual performance. 
 Figure 9.1     Reactions to training and taking a break from training. 
 A major consideration during breaks, especially for runners who have been accumulating a high number of weekly miles, is that runners are used to consuming a certain amount of calories per day and maintaining a desired body weight. It is rather common to keep caloric intake the same during a break, which can easily lead to putting on weight. For some, this may be good, but at some point during a prolonged break there must be a change in eating habits so that the body doesn’t gain excess fat tissue. Staying healthy is rule number 1 when you are not exercising as much as you normally do. 
 Nonplanned Breaks 
 A few things must be considered when faced with a nonplanned break in training. Most important is to accept the fact that a break is necessary and to do whatever needs to be done to fix the problem. Also, if returning to serious training is important, supplemental training may minimize loss of fitness during the break from running. 
 In fact, some types of cross-training will actually build up resistance to further problems once back to regular running, with the result that running will be better than before. For example, resistance training may improve body balance and lead to a more economical running technique. Research has shown that performing half-squats with relatively light weights can improve running performance. In a sense, an unplanned break may end up being a blessing in disguise, especially if it leads to finding new modes of exercise that result in overall improvement in running performance. 
 When an injury is the culprit leading to a break, there are usually two types—those that prevent continued use of the legs and those that allow aerobic involvement of some of the running muscles in the legs. For example, a broken leg will definitely prevent any activity involving impact on that leg, and the only type of aerobic training that may be possible will involve using the arms—swimming, for example. An ankle or foot injury may prevent running but may allow deep-water running, which allows the hip and many leg muscles to be trained fairly seriously. 
 Elliptical trainers and cycles may be an approach to exercise that doesn’t involve impact, and even uphill walking on a treadmill may work for some runners when they are not able to actually run. The important thing when performing cross-training is to make sure that what you are doing is not aggravating the problem further, thus prolonging the time off from true run training. With any injury that lasts more than just a couple of days, it is a good idea to consult with a physical therapist, athletic trainer, or medical doctor. Something that seems very minor to you could be a major problem down the road, and sometimes what seems major is a simple issue to deal with, with proper advice. 
 Planned Breaks 
 Most runners will plan a year of training so that they get some time off, and this is a good idea. First of all, I like to think of time off from training as part of the training process. Just as the body reacts positively to easy days of training between quality sessions, so can a bit of time away from training allow the body, and mind, to reach a new level of performance once back to a regular training schedule. 
 It is best to base your training break on what races you anticipate running in coming months. In other words, have a long-range training plan that includes desired breaks, fully understanding that an unplanned break may alter that plan. 
 The length of a planned break depends on how stressful training has been in the preceding weeks and months. If you have taken a few minor injury or illness breaks throughout the year, then a planned break may not even be needed, but don’t be pessimistic and assume there will be injury or illness breaks in the months ahead, so there is no need to plan a break. 
 I tend to favor 2 weeks as the minimum time for a planned break, with about 6 weeks being the maximum, provided you plan to continue with serious running. Obviously, an unplanned break may be longer. 
 Table 9.1 is a guide for adjusting training intensity based on time away from running training. This table allows adjustments in training speeds as determined by VDOT values. Current VDOT dictates training speeds, and as you race better, your training VDOT increases. On the other hand, as you spend time away from training, current VDOT will also deteriorate to some degree. 
 Table 9.1 shows how to adjust your VDOT value as dictated by time away from training and whether or not you have engaged in leg-associated aerobic training. If you haven’t been doing any leg-associated aerobic training, you should use the values under the heading of FVDOT-1, but if your time off has included this type of exercise, then use column FVDOT-2. 
 If you go down to the values associated with 6 weeks (42 days) off from running, you see that, if not doing some leg training, your VDOT has dropped by about 11 percent (.889 fraction of the starting value when in good shape). With good cross-training, FVDOT-2 suggests that the loss in VDOT is just about half of that 11 percent drop associated with not doing anything during the time off (.944 fraction of the VDOT value when in good shape). 
 Table 9.1    VDOT Adjustments for Training Breaks 
 Training break 
 FVDOT-1 
 FVDOT-2 
 Up to 5 days 
 1.000 
 1.000 
 6 days 
 .997 
 .998 
 7 days 
 .994 
 .997 
 10 days 
 .985 
 .992 
 14 days 
 .973 
 .986 
 21 days 
 .952 
 .976 
 28 days 
 .931 
 .965 
 35 days 
 .910 
 .955 
 42 days 
 .889 
 .944 
 49 days 
 .868 
 .934 
 56 days 
 .847 
 .923 
 63 days 
 .826 
 .913 
 70 days 
 .805 
 .902 
 72 days or more 
 .800 
 .900 
 As shown in table 9.1 , there is no loss with only 5 days without training. After about 10 weeks off from running, you probably have lost about as much as you are going to lose, about 20 percent. However, to say that 20 percent is about all you can lose is misleading because if you gain a fair amount of unnecessary weight, then the VDOT value can be negatively affected further until you are back to ideal running weight. To calculate how much change can be expected in your returning VDOT value, complete the steps in figure 9.2 . 
 FIGURE 9.2 Estimating Return VDOT Value 
 From J. Daniels, Daniels’ Running Formula, 4th ed. (Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics, 2022). 
 ADJUSTING MILEAGE OR DURATION OF TRAINING 
 Table 9.2 provides a guide, and examples, for adjusting the amount of training you should schedule after a prolonged break, planned or not. I have indicated four categories of adjustments, and these are based on time missed from running: 5 days or fewer (category 1), up to 4 weeks (category 2), between 4 and 8 weeks (category 3), and more than 8 weeks (category 4). 
 Table 9.2    Adjustments to Training Loads After a Break 
 Category 
 Time off 
 Adjustment to workload 
 % of prebreak VDOT 
 1 
 Up to 5 days 
 5 days E @ no more than 100% load 
 100% 
 2 
 6-28 days 
 1st half E @ 50% load 
 93.1-99.7% or 96.5-99.8% (see table 9.1 ) 
 2nd half E @ 75% load 
 93.1-99.7% or 96.5-99.8% (see table 9.1 ) 
 6 days 
 3 days E @ 50% load + 3 days E @ 75% load 
 99.7-99.8% 
 28 days 
 14 days E @ 50% load + 14 days E @ 75% load 
 93.1-96.5% 
 3 
 4-8 weeks 
 1st 3rd E @ 33% load 
 84.7-93.1% or 92.3-96.5% (see table 9.1 ) 
 2nd 3rd E @ 50% load 
 84.7-93.1% or 92.3-96.5% (see table 9.1 ) 
 Final 3rd E @ 75% load 
 84.7-93.1% or 92.3-96.5% (see table 9.1 ) 
 29 days 
 9 days @ 33% load + 10 days @ 50% load + 10 days @ 75% load + some strides (ST) 
 93.0-96.4% 
 8 weeks 
 18 days E @ 33% load + 19 days E @ 50% load +19 days E @ 75% load + some ST 
 84.7-92.3% 
 4 
 8 weeks or more 
 3 weeks E @ 33% load, but not more than 30 miles/wk 
 80.0-84.7% or 90.0-92.3% (see table 9.1 ) 
 3 weeks E @ 50% load, but not more than 40 miles/wk 
 80.0-84.7% or 90.0-92.3% (see table 9.1 ) 
 3 weeks E @ 70% load + ST, but not more than 60 miles/wk 
 80.0-84.7% or 90.0-92.3% (see table 9.1 ) 
 3 weeks E @ 85% load + ST & R , but not more than 75 miles/wk 
 80.0-84.7% or 90.0-92.3% (see table 9.1 ) 
 3 weeks E @ 100% load + ST & T & R , but not more than 90 miles/wk 
 80.0-84.7% or 90.0-92.3% (see table 9.1 ) 
 For runners who fit into category 2, for the first half of their return-to-training time, they should not run a total weekly mileage that is more than 50 percent of what they were doing before missing training, and the second half of their return time can total 75 percent of prebreak mileage. If these runners did not engage in cross-training during time off, then the return VDOT value would be 93.1 percent of prebreak VDOT, from column FVDOT-1 in table 9.1 . 
 Runners who missed 6 weeks of run training but who diligently performed cross-training involving aerobic leg exercises would be placed in category 3. Their cross-training drops their VDOT to 94.4 percent of the presetback value (from table 9.1 ), and from table 9.2 , the first third of their return mileage should not be more than 33 percent of presetback mileage. If they were previously totaling 60 miles per week, these first 2 weeks would total not more than 20 miles each. Then the next 2 weeks could total 30 miles per week, and the final 2 weeks of return mileage could be 45 per week. In addition, these runners could include regular strides during or after some of their E runs. 
 After adjusting training loads and intensities for a return to training following a setback, it should be OK to engage in whatever normal amount of training was typical before the setback. Make adjustments to return VDOT that may be a result of weight gain, as outlined earlier in this chapter. 
 ADDING SUPPLEMENTAL TRAINING 
 When people decide to take up running, the first thing they usually consider is how much time they can commit to running, both in terms of time per day and days per week or per month. Certainly, it is important to schedule time for running, but often little or no time is set aside for other activities that may also lead to better running. These nonrunning activities include such things as stretching, resistance training, massage, ice baths, and yoga. Unfortunately, some of these things take time and some even cost money, but if you do have the time and finances, they may be beneficial. 
 One type of supplemental training that has been shown to result in better running performance is resistance training, and I encourage all runners to include resistance training in their weekly program. 
 If you have access to a gym with weight machines, a few exercises that can help your running include hamstring curls, knee extensions, hip abduction and adduction exercises, and abdominal and back exercises. If you have the time and inclination, arm exercises often make you feel better in general, although they are usually of no real benefit in terms of helping you run. If you decide to do resistance training with free weights, concentrate first on proper technique, and add resistance gradually over time. 
 Stretching and resistance training are important adjuncts to a running regimen to help prevent injuries commonly incurred by runners. 
 Possibly the greatest benefit of leg strengthening is to build a resistance to common running injuries. In other words, resistance training may not improve your running as much as it builds resistance to injury, which allows you to run more or faster without getting hurt. Then the harder running training makes you a better runner. 
 In addition to helping ward off injuries, some resistance work can actually improve running economy (lessen the energy demand of running). The reasons are not clear, but it is assumed that being a little stronger gives you a more solid base, more controlled stride, and less unnecessary movement in running technique. Hill running, both uphill and downhill, can also be useful in building strength and running economy. 
 A warning about downhill running is appropriate at this point because running on too steep of a downhill course or on hard road surfaces can increase your chance of hurting areas in your hips, knees, and feet. The key to downhill running is to use a gradual hill, one of only 2 or 3 percent of slope (for comparison, the steepest hill allowed on interstate highways is 6 percent, so make it a fair bit less than those steeper highway hills). When running downhill, it is important to avoid overstriding; instead, concentrate on a light, fast leg turnover. Make downhill running feel as if you are “rolling” down the hill rather than bounding down, and it may help to land rear-footed, rather than up on the balls of your feet. 
 On the other hand, uphill running can be on just about any steepness of slope because you are not really pounding into the ground as hard as on a flat surface, so you get the benefit of strengthening the pushing-off muscles and the hip flexors, while reducing the landing shock associated with flat or downhill running. If you do uphill running on a hill outside, take it very easy running back down to the bottom. This brings up a great advantage of doing uphill runs on a treadmill; you can run up for any period of time, and when you need a break, you just hop off the treadmill and you don’t have to run down to start the next uphill run. 
 Some people refer to supplemental training as cross-training. The term used doesn’t really matter; the point is to stress some areas of your body that may take a beating while running, especially high-mileage running. If you take on runs that are longer than you have built up to at a gradual pace, your good running mechanics may deteriorate, and nothing leads to running injury more quickly than poor running mechanics. In fact, any time you feel you are getting “sloppy” with your running technique, it is time to terminate that run. Spend a little more time in the weight room or doing circuit training or other activity, and you will see your running become more enjoyable and you will feel yourself getting stronger during your regular workout sessions. 
 Just as you need to carefully increase the amount and speed of your running workouts, so do you need to carefully increase the stress of any supplemental training you include in your overall program. My general rule is that you give your body a good 4 weeks at one level of training stress before increasing that stress—it’s better to undertrain than to overtrain. For example, when considering run mileage, you are better to stay at a set amount of weekly mileage for a good 4 weeks before increasing that amount, but when you do increase, the increase can be a little more than just adding 2 or 3 miles to your weekly total. Take the same approach to resistance training: Stay at one level of stress for about 4 weeks before moving to a greater stress. 
 In summary, consider adding supplemental training to your overall program, even if it is just some exercises you can do in your house or backyard. Getting stronger will increase your confidence, will improve your running economy, and will help ward off those little injuries that often plague runners at all levels of proficiency. 
 I have included a relatively simple circuit routine that does not require equipment, so all the resistance is body weight. You will notice that stations 1 and 4 involve performing half of a 1-minute maximum. For example, station 1, a push-up station, asks for you to perform half of your 1-minute maximum, which means, before getting involved in the circuit, you first need to establish how many push-ups you can do in 1 minute so you know how many to do each time you arrive at station 1. 
 Push-Ups 
 The circuit starts with half of your 1-minute maximum of push-ups. Support the body on hands and toes in a plank position. The arms should extend straight down to the floor from the shoulders. Lower the body until the chest nearly touches the floor. Using the arms, push the body back up to the starting position. 
 Side Leg Lifts 
 At station 2, do 10 side leg lifts with each leg. Lie on one side with legs straight. Support the body with one arm bent at the elbow with weight resting on the forearm. Raise the top leg so that the foot is above shoulder height. Return to the starting position. 
 High Knees 
 For station 3, do 30 high knee lifts with each leg while running in place ( figure 9.3 ). Start in a standing position and quickly bring one knee up. Alternate right and left knees to maintain a continuous motion. 
 Figure 9.3     High knee. 
 Crunches 
 For station 4 do half of your 1-minute maximum of crunches. Lie on the back with knees bent and feet on the floor. Place hands behind the head (without holding the head), behind the ears, or across the chest. Steadily raise the head and shoulders off of the floor to an upright position and return to the starting position. 
 Recovery Run and Stretch 
 Station 5 is a 1-minute run or a 400-meter run. At station 6 do 2 minutes of stretching of any kind. 
 Squat Thrusts 
 At station 7, do 10 squat thrusts (burpees). Start from a standing position and drop into a squat with both hands touching the ground outside the feet ( figure 9.4 a ). Jump the legs back so that the body is in a push-up position ( figure 9.4 b ), and then jump back into the squatting position. Jump back to a standing position to complete one repetition ( figure 9.4 c ). 
 Leg Lifts 
 For station 8, complete 10 leg lifts with each leg, first resting on forearms and facing upward with the hips off the ground. Bend one leg for balance and lift the other leg to at least the height of the bent leg. Then, turn over and rest on the forearms while facing downward. Keeping one leg straight, raise the other leg up off of the ground as far as is comfortable. Complete 10 leg lifts with each leg. 
 Figure 9.4     Squat thrust. 
 Arm and Leg Flapping 
 At station 9, lie on the belly with arms over the head and legs straight out. Alternately flap the arms and legs up and down until both arms and legs have been raised and lowered 20 times. 
 Recovery Run 
 For station 10, run for 2 minutes or for 800 meters. 
 I recommend that people following this routine go through the entire circuit three times, preferably two or three times each week. Stations 5 and 10 are runs of 1 minute and 2 minutes. These are recovery stations, so the runs are not to be particularly fast. The goal is to allow you to recover from resistance work before going to the next resistance station. 
 For those who use this circuit routine, it is a good idea to time yourself every few weeks for the full three times through. You will be surprised how much faster you will get through the entire 10 stations three times. 
 