 
 Chapter 7 Treadmill Training 
 Chapter 7 
 Treadmill Training 
 Training doesn’t have to be uncomfortable to produce beneficial results. 
 Most of us like to think that one big advantage runners have over other athletes or, more simply stated, that running has over many other types of aerobic exercise is the simplicity and freedom of the sport. You really can run just about anywhere and for free. So why do treadmill training? 
 I remember coaching a sailor during the Gulf War who was 6 feet, 4 inches tall (1.9 m) and weighed 185 pounds (84 kg). He maintained an 80-mile-per-week (129 km) running program for most of the year that I trained him. This sounds reasonable enough for someone training for a marathon, but when you consider that he was limited to doing all his training on the decks of his aircraft carrier, treadmill running doesn’t seem quite so limiting after all. 
 Some inmates I worked with at a state prison held an annual marathon within their prison walls. The course was a 1-mile (1.6 km) loop that changed surfaces each loop, from grass to asphalt to dirt to cement. One of the guys averaged 40 miles (64 km) a week in that yard. Another runner I coached a few years ago ran from home to work and back each day (in New York City, by the way). On very cold and windy days he sometimes got a ride home, and on those days he ran in place for up to an hour and a half in his living room to make sure he wasn’t cheating himself out of mileage. 
 Then there was the law student I used to watch run around the 400-meter track just outside our lab when I was studying in graduate school. He seemed to go on forever, every day. I finally went down to meet him one day, and we ran together for a few miles while we talked. It turned out that he ran 80 laps on that track 6 days each week. His head was shaved, he wore high-top basketball shoes (with two pairs of heavy wool socks), and red cotton shorts, nothing more. Rumor had it that on really cold days he would put on a T-shirt, but I never saw that myself. Understand that this was in March in Michigan, not Arizona or some other nice, warm southern state. When I asked the 80-laps-per-day guy why not fewer laps at a little faster pace, he said, “No, the purpose of my running isn’t to get in shape; the purpose is to have some time to myself, away from my studies.” This sure makes treadmill running seem like the most humdrum running experience you could possibly have. 
 Let me offer a few more experiences when treadmill running may be a good idea. How about Phoenix in July? Or Minnesota (or Cortland, New York) in February? Atlanta in August? 
 What a media event it could be to get the top marathoners in the world all face-to-face in a big gymnasium on their own treadmill. The room is held at a constant temperature of 55 ˚F (or about 15 ˚C) and 30 percent humidity. The gun goes off and the winner is the one who logs 42,195 meters (26.22 miles) the fastest. Competitors are free to change the treadmill speed at any time and to eat and drink at will or visit a nearby toilet or hop on a scale to check their body weight to keep an eye on water loss. 
 The bottom line is that treadmill running can be useful for all runners, not only on days of adverse weather, but even on nice days when there is a need for control or during injury rehabilitation. There is a lot you can do on a treadmill with minimal boredom. 
 One of the biggest advantages of treadmill running is that you can accurately control intensity. With overground running in nice weather conditions, intensity can be controlled only by changing running speed. On the treadmill, practically unlimited combinations of speed and grade can be employed to subject the runner to the desired intensity of exercise. You can run at a pretty slow pace, but with the right grade set on the treadmill, the task can be made equal to the energy demand of just about any speed you want the demand to be. 
 Possibly the greatest disadvantage of treadmill running is not being able to share your run with a partner or group of other runners. However, workouts in which two runners alternate time on and off the treadmill can be beneficial. For example, if a treadmill workout involves running for 1 minute up a tough grade followed by a 1-minute rest (off the treadmill), two runners can alternate running and resting by just hopping on and off the treadmill when it is their turn. I have done this with my college teams for many years, with considerable success. 
 On the other hand, some people, me included, like to be by themselves on some runs, and treadmills can provide this atmosphere. I remember a period of time when I used to arrive about an hour early to work at a lab where I did a lot of treadmill testing to get in an hour of treadmill running before anyone else arrived. No matter how I ran, how I breathed, or how I carried my arms or legs, the one thing I did know was the speed at which I was running and how far I had gone. What could be simpler, or more relaxing, than that? 
 Treadmill training by no means has to be limited to steady running at a pace where the stress level is conducive to falling asleep. By the way, instead of wearing a wristwatch, I have always preferred a large wall clock, with a large sweep second hand, located off to one side where I can’t see it unless I turn my head in its direction rather than in front of me where I have to watch every minute go by. You can use the clock to track work and rest and the sweep second hand to take heart rate readings if you are so inclined. If you are going to give up the freedom of an outside run for time on a treadmill, rid yourself of carrying excess baggage. Not even a shirt (or shorts, for that matter) is necessary if you are on your own treadmill at home. 
 One of the foremost U.S. triathletes in history, Hunter Kemper found the treadmill to be a valuable training tool, as do many elite and nonelite distance event athletes throughout the world. 
 STEADY RUNNING AND INTERMITTENT RUNNING 
 There are only two types of training a person can do: steady running and intermittent (work/recovery) running. By steady running I mean nonstop running at a consistent intensity. The intensity may be very easy, as at the beginning of a warm-up, during a postworkout cool-down, or as recovery from harder intermittent work bouts, or it may be moderate, as when running at M pace or T pace. 
 Any intensity greater than T pace will usually be associated with intermittent running, such as during I or R workouts, types of training that stress the cardiovascular system to its maximum, or that work on mechanics, speed, and economy. Intermittent training simply means the workout is done by mixing bouts of hard work with bouts of recovery, which may or may not involve light work. Usually, the harder you work, the more time you take for recovery, and on a treadmill this is easy to control. A single training session can also involve a mixture of intensities and durations of running with varying bouts of recovery, typically referred to as fartlek training. 
 HILL TRAINING 
 A big advantage treadmill running has over ground running is in the area of hill training. Overground hill work invariably involves both uphill and downhill running, which can be good if that is what you want. However, often a runner wants the benefits of uphill running without the negative aspects of running back down for the next uphill run, and this can be easily accomplished on a treadmill, where you can run up for a period of time and then just hop off the treadmill for recovery before the next uphill run. This uphill-only running can be desirable for a runner who is nursing an injury that is aggravated by downhill landing shock but not by running uphill because of the reduced impact. It is possible to complete demanding workouts at a slow pace provided the grade is steep enough. 
 Runners who want to prepare for a race that involves a good deal of both uphill and downhill running, as is experienced in the Boston Marathon, for example, can use the treadmill to train for both uphill and downhill running. To provide a downhill situation on a typical treadmill you can place stout boards (I use railroad ties) under the back support. For example, if you have a treadmill that goes up to a 20 percent grade and you place a block of wood under the rear so that it reads a 5 percent grade when a carpenter’s level shows the treadmill belt to be 0 percent, then you know you can go down to −5 percent if you set the dial at 0. You will then have a treadmill that can go from a −5 percent to +15 percent grade. The important factor in performing this grade adjustment is to make sure your treadmill is solidly attached to the supporting block or blocks so that vibration or an unsuspecting person doesn’t knock it off its block. 
 A word of caution about downhill running. Just as uphill running reduces landing shock, so does downhill running increase landing shock. It is wise to add bouts of downhill running gradually. Spend about 4 weeks at one setting before increasing the grade or speed to a more demanding setting. Downhill running can easily increase quadriceps muscle soreness if you are going too fast or running down more than just a few degrees of grade. Avoid increasing the stress of downhill running during the final couple of weeks before a race, and don’t initiate downhill running during the final 4 to 6 weeks before an important race. 
 Always experiment with any new type of training during the off-season or early in the start of a prolonged training cycle. The majority of treadmill training is either on a level or moderate positive grade for most people, and negative-grade running need not be of concern for average, or even elite, runners, except when planning to race on a course that has downhill sections. 
 TREADMILL TRAINING INTENSITY 
 In an effort to minimize boredom and to provide more variety to treadmill training, I have prepared a table of intensities that allows a runner to use a variety of speed and grade combinations to impose the desired stress on the body. One of the big advantages of using this intensity table is that it allows runners to achieve the desired training stress without running fast all the time. Some treadmills will not go fast enough to provide for ideal interval training, but by adding a grade, the desired benefit can be accomplished. 
 Table 7.1 shows the grade that, if applied at the mph speed shown at the top, will produce an effort equal to running at the pace shown at the left of the table, in the mile column. For example, a 6:11 mile pace could be accomplished by running at 6 mph on a 10.2 percent grade, or 7 mph at a 7 percent grade, or 9.5 mph at a 2.3 percent grade. A 4:13 mile effort (63-second 400-meter effort) could be done at 6 mph at a 21.2 percent grade, or any of the other combinations shown in that row, ending with 12 mph at a 4.3 percent grade. The various mile paces were chosen as representative of aerobic capacity, in increments of 5. 
 Although it is possible to get equivalent work done at slow speeds and steep grades, it is better to use faster speeds when attempting to do comparative R training. The treadmill is best for I -type training, T training, and steady runs. I think very good I workouts are done at steep grades and slower speeds. You can try doing 20 runs of 30 seconds each with 30-second rests, and if that is not too demanding, try 10 runs of 1 minute each with 1-minute rests. An advantage of doing 30/30 or 60/60 second work/rest bouts is that two people can share the same treadmill if both want to work at the same intensity. Doing this means one runner is running while the other is resting, and both just hop on or off every 30 or 60 seconds, depending on the program they are using. Also, adding 1 percent to the treadmill grade is similar to increasing the speed of running by about 10 to 15 seconds per mile. 
 It is also possible for each runner who uses a treadmill to create his or her own intensity table. Each time you train on a treadmill, try different combinations of speed and grade and record how demanding each combination feels. I suggest starting at 6 mph and 2.5 percent grade, then 6 mph at 5 percent grade, then try 6 mph at 7.5, 10, 12.5, 15, 17.5, and finally 20 percent grades. In a different training session, try 7 mph at a variety of grades, then 8 mph, 9 mph, and 10 mph with whatever you can handle on your treadmill. For each combination of speed and grade, run for a steady 5 or 6 minutes and during the final minute of each run, record a number from 1 to 5: 1 = very easy, 2 = some demand, 3 = comfortably hard, 4 = hard, and 5 = very hard or maximal effort. Figure a 1 rating equals what you could easily do for an L run, 2 = about M pace, 3 = T pace, 4 = about 5K race effort, and 5 = about what you might be able to handle for 5 to 6 minutes. Don’t try to perform many of the speed and grade combinations in the same session, but after doing as many as you can handle, make a table showing the combinations that are suitable for you when trying different workouts. Once you fill out your table, which will take weeks to achieve, and start doing a couple sessions per week, keep in mind that what feels difficult at first may become easier as time goes by, so be willing to change what you use for different training intensities. 
 Performing a ministudy like this makes treadmill running meaningful and time flies by. You tend to concentrate on your rating system rather than how much work you are doing. Heart rates can also be checked and recorded with each speed and grade combination, which will give additional information when deciding on a particular workout. Use the following heart-rate rankings: 1 = up to 80 percent of max HR, 2 = 81 to 85 percent of max, 3 = 86 to 90 percent of max, 4 = 91 to 99 percent of max, and 5 = max HR, or about equal to current mile race pace effort. 
 TREADMILL CALIBRATION 
 If you are like me, you want to be accurate in knowing how fast you are running, particularly when doing I , T, or other quality workouts. This requires calibrating your treadmill, which is done as follows. 
 With the treadmill power off, make a mark on the side of the running belt with a small piece of white tape. Lay a measuring tape on the belt, starting at this mark. Push the running belt slowly around, making small pencil marks when needed to adjust the tape and remind yourself of the accumulating distance being measured. Continue measuring until you reach the starting mark and record the total distance to the nearest quarter inch, or .5 centimeter. If you are measuring in feet and inches, convert the total inches to centimeters by multiplying the total inches by 2.54 (there are 2.54 centimeters per inch). If you are using metric measurements, record the total distance in centimeters. Let’s say, for example, that you end up with a running belt that is 542.9 centimeters. 
 Convert the centimeter distance to meters by dividing the centimeter distance by 100. Example: 542.9 / 100 = 5.429 meters in the example just given. 
 Multiply belt length by 10 to get the distance (D) traveled in 10 belt revolutions. Example: D = 5.429 × 10 = 54.29 meters. 
 Place an identifying mark on the edge of the belt using something like duct tape at the place where you started your measurements from. You should be able to see this mark when the belt is moving fast. 
 The speed of the treadmill is determined by timing 10 revolutions of the belt, as follows. 
 With the belt moving at the speed you want, pick a spot on the treadmill at which you will start timing when the mark you put on the treadmill reaches it. 
 Start a stopwatch when the mark on the belt reaches that spot. I usually start and stop the watch when the mark on the belt disappears off the end of the treadmill, but this is difficult if you are timing by yourself. Ideally, the timing procedure is done with someone running on the treadmill, because the belt speed may be slowed by someone on it. It is easiest to have someone other than the runner do the timing. 
 Count each time the mark on the belt matches the timing spot, starting your count with 0 when the watch is started. Count out loud each time the spots match, and stop the stopwatch on the count of 10. You should do the timing more than once to see if you get the same count; repeat until you get within a few tenths of a second on repeating timings. 
 Let’s say your watch says 13.03 seconds for those timed 10 revolutions. Assign the 10-revolution time the letter T and the distance of the 10 revolutions (54.29 meters in our example) the letter D . Speed in meters per minute is arrived at as follows: (D × 60) / T = m/min. Example: (54.29 × 60) / 13.03 = 250 m/min (V , belt velocity) 
 If you want a particular speed (V), you can calculate the T needed for that V as follows: (D × 60) / V = T. Example: for 268 m/min, 54.29 × 60 / 268 = 12.15 seconds 
 In this example, a speed of 268 meters per minute (6:00 mile pace) is achieved by adjusting the treadmill speed until you get the time of 12.15 seconds for 10 revolutions. It is useful to understand how relative various mile paces and velocities in meters per minute are in terms of mph. It is also nice to know what mph to set the treadmill belt. Table 7.2 shows conversions among mph, mile pace, and m/min, and table 7.3 shows the relationship among mph, mile time, and m/min. In addition, for those who want to make more detailed comparisons of different speeds of movement, see the appendix , Time and Pace Conversions. 
 Table 7.2    Conversions for Miles per Hour, Mile Pace, and Meters per Minute 
 Miles per hour to mile pace 
 Formula 
 Example: 9.0 mph 
 60 ÷ mph = mile pace 
 60 ÷ 9.0 = 6.6667 min/mile 
 Decimal minutes × 60 = seconds 
 .6667 × 60 = 40 sec, so 6:40 mile 
 Mile pace to miles per hour 
 Formula 
 Example: 6:40 mile pace 
 Seconds ÷ 60 = decimal minutes 
 40 ÷ 60 = .6667 (plus 6 min = 6.6667 min) 
 60 ÷ minutes per mile = mph 
 60 ÷ 6.6667 = 9.0 mph 
 Meters per minute to miles per hour 
 Formula 
 Example: 241.4 m/min 
 m/min × 60 = m/hr 
 241.4 × 60 = 14,484 m/hr 
 m/hr ÷ 1,609.344 m* = mph 
 14,484 ÷ 1,609.344 = 9.0 mph 
 Miles per hour to meters per minute 
 Formula 
 Example: 9.0 mph 
 mph × 1,609.344* = m/hr 
 9.0 × 1,609.344 = 14,484 m/hr 
 m/hr ÷ 60 = m/min 
 14,484 ÷ 60 =241.4 m/min 
 Meters per minute to mile pace 
 Formula 
 Example: 241.4 m/min 
 1,609.344* ÷ (m/min) = min/mile 
 1,609.344 ÷ 241.4 = 6.6667 min/mile 
 Decimal minutes × 60 = seconds 
 .6667 × 60 = 40 sec, so 6:40 mile 
 Mile pace to meters per minute 
 Formula 
 Example: 6:40 mile pace 
 Seconds ÷ 60 = decimal minutes 
 40/60 = .6667 min 
 Minutes + decimal minutes = min/mile 
 6 + .6667 = 6.6667 min/mile 
 1,609.344* ÷ (min/mile) = m/min 
 1,609.344 ÷ 6.6667 = 241.4 m/min 
 1,609.344 m is equal to 1 mile. 
 Table created by Jack Daniels’ Running Calculator designed by the Run SMART Project. 
 