=== PAGE 697 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  General Description
7
673
The shoulder is the area of upper limb attachment to 
the trunk (Fig. 7.1B).
The arm is the part of the upper limb between the 
shoulder and the elbow joint; the forearm is between the 
elbow joint and the wrist joint; and the hand is distal to 
the wrist joint.
Conceptual overview
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The upper limb is associated with the lateral aspect of the 
lower portion of the neck and with the thoracic wall. It is 
suspended from the trunk by muscles and a small skeletal 
articulation between the clavicle and the sternum—the 
sternoclavicular joint. Based on the position of its major 
joints and component bones, the upper limb is divided into 
shoulder, arm, forearm, and hand (Fig. 7.1A).
Fig. 7.1  Upper limb. A. Anterior view of the upper limb. B. Superior view of the shoulder. 
Spinous process of vertebra TI
Neck
Shoulder
Glenohumeral joint
Arm
Elbow joint
Forearm
Wrist joint
Hand
B
A
Thoracic wall
Rib I
Rib I
Axilla
Scapula
Manubrium
of sternum
Clavicle

=== PAGE 698 ===
Upper Limb
674
of the arch and forms the anterior wall of the tunnel. The 
median nerve and all the long flexor tendons passing from 
the forearm to the digits of the hand pass through the 
carpal tunnel.
FUNCTIONS
Positioning the hand
Unlike the lower limb, which is used for support, stability, 
and locomotion, the upper limb is highly mobile for posi­
tioning the hand in space.
The shoulder is suspended from the trunk predomi­
nantly by muscles and can therefore be moved relative 
to the body. Sliding (protraction and retraction) and rotat­
ing the scapula on the thoracic wall changes the position 
of the glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint) and extends 
the reach of the hand (Fig. 7.3). The glenohumeral joint 
allows the arm to move around three axes with a wide 
range of motion. Movements of the arm at this joint are 
The axilla, cubital fossa, and carpal tunnel are signifi­
cant areas of transition between the different parts of the 
limb (Fig. 7.2). Important structures pass through, or are 
related to, each of these areas.
The axilla is an irregularly shaped pyramidal area 
formed by muscles and bones of the shoulder and the 
lateral surface of the thoracic wall. The apex or inlet opens 
directly into the lower portion of the neck. The skin of the 
armpit forms the floor. All major structures that pass 
between the neck and arm pass through the axilla.
The cubital fossa is a triangularly shaped depression 
formed by muscles anterior to the elbow joint. The major 
artery, the brachial artery, passing from the arm to the 
forearm passes through this fossa, as does one of the major 
nerves of the upper limb, the median nerve.
The carpal tunnel is the gateway to the palm of the 
hand. Its posterior, lateral, and medial walls form an arch, 
which is made up of small carpal bones in the proximal 
region of the hand. A thick band of connective tissue, the 
flexor retinaculum, spans the distance between each side 
Fig. 7.2  Areas of transition in the upper limb. 
Axilla
Cubital fossa
Carpal tunnel

=== PAGE 699 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Functions
7
675
Fig. 7.3  Movements of the scapula. A. Rotation. B. Protraction and retraction. 
Scapula
Retraction
Shoulder
Humerus
Clavicle
Protraction
Abduction
Adduction
A
B

=== PAGE 700 ===
Upper Limb
676
Fig. 7.4  Movements of the arm at the glenohumeral joint. 
Flexion
Extension
Lateral rotation
Medial rotation 
Adduction
Abduction
Abduction
Adduction
Flexion
Extension
Circumduction
Fig. 7.5  Movements of the forearm. A. Flexion and extension at the elbow joint. B. Pronation and supination. 
A
B
Palm posterior
Palm anterior
Pronation
Radius
Ulna
Supination
Palm anterior
Extension
Flexion
flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, medial rotation 
(internal rotation), lateral rotation (external rotation), and 
circumduction (Fig. 7.4).
The major movements at the elbow joint are flexion 
and extension of the forearm (Fig. 7.5A). At the other end 
of the forearm, the distal end of the lateral bone, the radius, 
can be flipped over the adjacent head of the medial bone, 
the ulna. Because the hand is articulated with the radius, 
it can be efficiently moved from a palm-anterior position to 
a palm-posterior position simply by crossing the distal end 

=== PAGE 701 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Functions
7
677
Fig. 7.6  Movements of the hand at the wrist joint. 
Abduction
Adduction
Extension
Flexion
Abduction
Adduction
Flexion
Extension
of the radius over the ulna (Fig. 7.5B). This movement, 
termed pronation, occurs solely in the forearm. Supination 
returns the hand to the anatomical position.
At the wrist joint, the hand can be abducted, adducted, 
flexed, extended, and circumducted (Fig. 7.6). These move­
ments, combined with those of the shoulder, arm, and 
forearm, enable the hand to be placed in a wide range of 
positions relative to the body.
The hand as a mechanical tool
One of the major functions of the hand is to grip and 
manipulate objects. Gripping objects generally involves 
flexing the fingers against the thumb. Depending on the 
type of grip, muscles in the hand act to:
■	 modify the actions of long tendons that emerge from the 
forearm and insert into the digits of the hand, and
■	 produce combinations of joint movements within each 
digit that cannot be generated by the long flexor and 
extensor tendons alone coming from the forearm.
The hand as a sensory tool
The hand is used to discriminate between objects on the 
basis of touch. The pads on the palmar aspect of the fingers 

=== PAGE 702 ===
Upper Limb
678
contain a high density of somatic sensory receptors. Also, 
the sensory cortex of the brain devoted to interpreting 
information from the hand, particularly from the thumb, 
is disproportionately large relative to that for many other 
regions of skin.
COMPONENT PARTS
Bones and joints
The bones of the shoulder consist of the scapula, clavicle, 
and proximal end of the humerus (Fig. 7.7).
The clavicle articulates medially with the manubrium 
of the sternum and laterally with the acromion of the 
scapula, which arches over the joint between the glenoid 
cavity of the scapula and the head of the humerus (the 
glenohumeral joint).
Fig. 7.7  Bones of the upper limb. 
Scapula
Clavicle
Acromion
Scapula
Humerus
Ulna
Radius
Carpal bones
Metacarpals
Phalanges
Glenoid cavity
The humerus is the bone of the arm (Fig. 7.7). The distal 
end of the humerus articulates with the bones of the 
forearm at the elbow joint, which is a hinge joint that 
allows flexion and extension of the forearm.
The forearm contains two bones:
■	 The lateral bone is the radius.
■	 The medial bone is the ulna (Fig. 7.7).
At the elbow joint, the proximal ends of the radius and 
ulna articulate with each other as well as with the humerus.
In addition to flexing and extending the forearm, the 
elbow joint allows the radius to spin on the humerus while 
sliding against the head of the ulna during pronation and 
supination of the hand.
The distal portions of the radius and the ulna also 
articulate with each other. This joint allows the end of the 

=== PAGE 704 ===
Upper Limb
680
Fig. 7.9  Muscles of the shoulder. A. Posterior shoulder. B. Anterior shoulder. C. Rotator cuff muscles. 
Supraspinatus
Subscapularis
Humerus
Acromion
Spine of scapula
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Coracoid process
Trapezius
Deltoid
Pectoralis major
Teres major
Latissimus dorsi
A
B
C
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Levator scapulae
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Muscles
Some muscles of the shoulder, such as the trapezius, 
levator scapulae, and rhomboids, connect the scapula and 
clavicle to the trunk. Other muscles connect the clavicle, 
scapula, and body wall to the proximal end of the humerus. 
These include the pectoralis major, pectoralis minor, 
latissimus dorsi, teres major, and deltoid (Fig. 7.9A,B). The 
most important of these muscles are the four rotator cuff 
muscles—the subscapularis, supraspinatus, infraspinatus, 
and teres minor muscles—which connect the scapula to 
the humerus and provide support for the glenohumeral 
joint (Fig. 7.9C).

=== PAGE 705 ===
7
681
Conceptual Overview  •  Relationship to Other Regions
modify the forces produced by tendons coming into the 
fingers and thumb from the forearm. Included among the 
intrinsic muscles of the hand are three small thenar 
muscles, which form a soft tissue mound, called the thenar 
eminence, over the palmar aspect of metacarpal I. The 
thenar muscles allow the thumb to move freely relative to 
the other fingers.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGIONS
Neck
The upper limb is directly related to the neck. Lying on each 
side of the superior thoracic aperture at the base of the 
neck is an axillary inlet, which is formed by:
■	 the lateral margin of rib I,
■	 the posterior surface of the clavicle,
■	 the superior margin of the scapula, and
Muscles in the arm and forearm are separated into 
anterior (flexor) and posterior (extensor) compartments by 
layers of fascia, bones, and ligaments (Fig. 7.10).
The anterior compartment of the arm lies anteriorly in 
position and is separated from muscles of the posterior 
compartment by the humerus and by medial and lateral 
intermuscular septa. These intermuscular septa are con­
tinuous with the deep fascia enclosing the arm and attach 
to the sides of the humerus.
In the forearm, the anterior and posterior compart­
ments are separated by a lateral intermuscular septum, the 
radius, the ulna, and an interosseous membrane, which 
joins adjacent sides of the radius and ulna (Fig. 7.10).
Muscles in the arm act mainly to move the forearm at 
the elbow joint, while those in the forearm function pre­
dominantly to move the hand at the wrist joint and the 
fingers and thumb.
Muscles found entirely in the hand, the intrinsic muscles, 
generate delicate movements of the digits of the hand and 
Fig. 7.10  Muscle components in the arm and forearm. 
Deep fascia
Deep
fascia
Skin
Anterior (flexor compartment)
Anterior (flexor compartment)
Posterior (extensor compartment)
Posterior (extensor compartment)
Intermuscular 
septa
Intermuscular septum
Ulna
Humerus
Interosseous
membrane
Thenar 
eminence
Radius
Medial
Lateral

=== PAGE 706 ===
Upper Limb
682
Fig. 7.11  Relationship of the upper limb to the neck. 
Axillary artery
Axillary vein
Axilla
Medial margin of
coracoid process
Humerus
Axillary inlet
Superior margin of scapula
Nerves to upper limb
Lateral margin of rib I
■	 the medial surface of the coracoid process of the scapula 
(Fig. 7.11).
The major artery and vein of the upper limb pass 
between the thorax and the limb by passing over rib I and 
through the axillary inlet. Nerves, predominantly derived 
from the cervical portion of the spinal cord, also pass 
through the axillary inlet and the axilla to supply the 
upper limb.
Back and thoracic wall
Muscles that attach the bones of the shoulder to the trunk 
are associated with the back and the thoracic wall and 

=== PAGE 707 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Points
7
683
axilla. Several arteries and veins that supply or drain the 
gland also originate from, or drain into, major axillary 
vessels.
KEY POINTS
Innervation by cervical and upper 
thoracic nerves
Innervation of the upper limb is by the brachial plexus, 
which is formed by the anterior rami of cervical spinal 
include the trapezius, levator scapulae, rhomboid major, 
rhomboid minor, and latissimus dorsi (Fig. 7.12).
The breast on the anterior thoracic wall has a number 
of significant relationships with the axilla and upper limb. 
It overlies the pectoralis major muscle, which forms most 
of the anterior wall of the axilla and attaches the humerus 
to the chest wall (Fig. 7.13). Often, part of the breast 
known as the axillary process extends around the lateral 
margin of the pectoralis major into the axilla.
Lymphatic drainage from lateral and superior parts 
of the breast is predominantly into lymph nodes in the 
Fig. 7.12  Muscles of the back and thoracic wall. 
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Levator scapulae
Fig. 7.13  Breast. 
Blood vessels and
lymphatics
Axillary process
Pectoralis major
Latissimus dorsi from back

=== PAGE 708 ===
Upper Limb
684
Selected joint movements are used to test myotomes 
(Fig. 7.15B):
■	 Abduction of the arm at the glenohumeral joint is 
controlled predominantly by C5.
■	 Flexion of the forearm at the elbow joint is controlled 
primarily by C6.
■	 Extension of the forearm at the elbow joint is controlled 
mainly by C7.
■	 Flexion of the fingers is controlled mainly by C8.
■	 Abduction and adduction of the index, middle, and ring 
fingers is controlled predominantly by T1.
In an unconscious patient, both somatic sensory and 
motor functions of spinal cord levels can be tested using 
tendon reflexes:
■	 A tap on the tendon of the biceps in the cubital fossa 
tests mainly for spinal cord level C6.
■	 A tap on the tendon of the triceps posterior to the elbow 
tests mainly for C7.
nerves C5 to C8, and T1 (Fig. 7.14). This plexus is initially 
formed in the neck and then continues through the axil­
lary inlet into the axilla. Major nerves that ultimately 
innervate the arm, forearm, and hand originate from the 
brachial plexus in the axilla.
As a consequence of this innervation pattern, clinical 
testing of lower cervical and T1 nerves is carried out by 
examining dermatomes, myotomes, and tendon reflexes in 
the upper limb. Another consequence is that the clinical 
signs of problems related to lower cervical nerves—pain; 
pins-and-needles sensations, or paresthesia; and muscle 
twitching—appear in the upper limb.
Dermatomes of the upper limb (Fig. 7.15A) are often 
tested for sensation. Areas where overlap of dermatomes is 
minimal include the:
■	 upper lateral region of the arm for spinal cord level C5,
■	 palmar pad of the thumb for spinal cord level C6,
■	 pad of the index finger for spinal cord level C7,
■	 pad of the little finger for spinal cord level C8, and
■	 skin on the medial aspect of the elbow for spinal cord 
level T1.
Fig. 7.14  Innervation of the upper limb. 
Anterior rami
Nerves
Musculocutaneous nerve
(C5 to C7)
Radial nerve
(C5 to C8,T1)
Median nerve
(C6 to C8,T1)
Ulnar nerve
(C[7], C8, T1)
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Brachial plexus

=== PAGE 710 ===
Upper Limb
686
The major spinal cord level associated with innervation 
of the diaphragm, C4, is immediately above the spinal cord 
levels associated with the upper limb.
Evaluation of dermatomes and myotomes in the upper 
limb can provide important information about potential 
breathing problems that might develop as complications of 
damage to the spinal cord in regions just below the C4 
spinal level.
Each of the major muscle compartments in the arm 
and forearm and each of the intrinsic muscles of the hand 
is innervated predominantly by one of the major nerves 
that originate from the brachial plexus in the axilla 
(Fig. 7.16A):
Fig. 7.16  Nerves of upper limb. A. Major nerves in the arm and forearm. B. Anterior and posterior areas of skin innervated by major peripheral 
nerves in the arm and forearm. 
Radial nerve 
• All muscles in posterior
  compartment of arm  
  and forearm
Ulnar nerve
• Most intrinsic muscles in hand
• Flexor carpi ulnaris and medial
  half of flexor digitorum profundus
  in forearm
Musculocutaneous nerve
• All muscles in anterior
  compartment of arm
Median nerve
• Most flexors in forearm
• Thenar muscles in hand
A
B
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
• Inferior lateral cutaneous 
   nerve of arm
• Posterior cutaneous 
   nerve of arm
• Posterior cutaneous 
   nerve of forearm
Musculocutaneous nerve
• Lateral cutaneous 
   nerve of forearm
Radial nerve
• Superficial branch
Posterior
T1
T2
Ulnar nerve
Median nerve
Radial nerve
• Inferior lateral 
   cutaneous 
   nerve of arm
Axillary nerve
• Superior lateral 
   cutaneous 
   nerve of arm
Axillary nerve
• Superior lateral 
   cutaneous 
   nerve of arm
Musculocutaneous nerve
• Lateral cutaneous 
   nerve of forearm
Radial nerve
• Superficial branch
Anterior
T1
T2

=== PAGE 711 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Points
7
687
■	 All muscles in the anterior compartment of the arm are 
innervated by the musculocutaneous nerve.
■	 The median nerve innervates the muscles in the anterior 
compartment of the forearm, with two exceptions—one 
flexor of the wrist (the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle) and 
part of one flexor of the fingers (the medial half of the 
flexor digitorum profundus muscle) are innervated by 
the ulnar nerve.
■	 Most intrinsic muscles of the hand are innervated by the 
ulnar nerve, except for the thenar muscles and two 
lateral lumbrical muscles, which are innervated by the 
median nerve.
■	 All muscles in the posterior compartments of the arm 
and forearm are innervated by the radial nerve.
In addition to innervating major muscle groups, each 
of the major peripheral nerves originating from the 
brachial plexus carries somatic sensory information 
from patches of skin quite different from dermatomes 
(Fig. 7.16B). Sensation in these areas can be used to test 
for peripheral nerve lesions:
■	 The musculocutaneous nerve innervates skin on the 
anterolateral side of the forearm.
■	 The median nerve innervates the palmar surface of the 
lateral three and one-half digits, and the ulnar nerve 
innervates the medial one and one-half digits.
■	 The radial nerve supplies skin on the posterior surface 
of the forearm and the dorsolateral surface of the hand.
Nerves related to bone
Three important nerves are directly related to parts of the 
humerus (Fig. 7.17):
■	 The axillary nerve, which supplies the deltoid muscle, a 
major abductor of the humerus at the glenohumeral 
joint, passes around the posterior aspect of the upper 
part of the humerus (the surgical neck).
■	 The radial nerve, which supplies all of the extensor 
muscles of the upper limb, passes diagonally around the 
Fig. 7.17  Nerves related to the humerus. 
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
Axillary nerve
Radial groove of humerus
Surgical neck of humerus
Medial epicondyle
posterior surface of the middle of the humerus in the 
radial groove.
■	 The ulnar nerve, which is ultimately destined for the 
hand, passes posteriorly to a bony protrusion, the medial 
epicondyle, on the medial side of the distal end of the 
humerus.
Fractures of the humerus in any one of these three 
regions can endanger the related nerve.

=== PAGE 712 ===
Upper Limb
688
Superficial veins
Large veins embedded in the superficial fascia of the upper 
limb are often used to access a patient’s vascular system 
and to withdraw blood. The most significant of these 
veins are the cephalic, basilic, and median cubital veins 
(Fig. 7.18).
The cephalic and basilic veins originate from the 
dorsal venous network on the back of the hand.
The cephalic vein originates over the anatomical snuff­
box at the base of the thumb, passes laterally around the 
distal forearm to reach the anterolateral surface of the 
limb, and then continues proximally. It crosses the elbow, 
then passes up the arm into a triangular depression—the 
Fig. 7.18  Veins in the superficial fascia of upper limb. The area of the cubital fossa is shown in yellow. 
Clavipectoral triangle
Clavicle
Cephalic vein
Biceps brachii
Axillary vein
Cephalic vein
Pectoralis major
Basilic vein
Median cubital vein
Dorsal venous network of hand
Basilic vein
Cubital fossa
Deltoid
clavipectoral triangle (deltopectoral triangle)—
between the pectoralis major muscle, deltoid muscle, and 
clavicle. In this depression, the vein passes into the axilla 
by penetrating deep fascia just inferior to the clavicle.
The basilic vein originates from the medial side of the 
dorsal venous network of the hand and passes proximally 
up the posteromedial surface of the forearm. It passes onto 
the anterior surface of the limb just inferior to the elbow 
and then continues proximally to penetrate deep fascia 
about midway up the arm.
At the elbow, the cephalic and basilic veins are con­
nected by the median cubital vein, which crosses the 
roof of the cubital fossa.

=== PAGE 714 ===
Upper Limb
690
Regional anatomy
SHOULDER
The shoulder is the region of upper limb attachment to 
the trunk.
The bone framework of the shoulder consists of:
■	 the clavicle and scapula, which form the pectoral 
girdle (shoulder girdle), and
■	 the proximal end of the humerus.
The superficial muscles of the shoulder consist of 
the trapezius and deltoid muscles, which together form the 
smooth muscular contour over the lateral part of the 
shoulder. These muscles connect the scapula and clavicle 
to the trunk and to the arm, respectively.
Bones
Clavicle
The clavicle is the only bony attachment between the trunk 
and the upper limb. It is palpable along its entire length and 
has a gentle S-shaped contour, with the forward-facing 
convex part medial and the forward-facing concave part 
lateral. The acromial (lateral) end of the clavicle is flat, 
whereas the sternal (medial) end is more robust and some­
what quadrangular in shape (Fig. 7.20).
The acromial end of the clavicle has a small oval facet 
on its surface for articulation with a similar facet on the 
medial surface of the acromion of the scapula.
The sternal end has a much larger facet for articulation 
mainly with the manubrium of the sternum, and to a lesser 
extent, with the first costal cartilage.
The inferior surface of the lateral third of the clavicle 
possesses a distinct tuberosity consisting of a tubercle 
(the conoid tubercle) and lateral roughening (the trap­
ezoid line), for attachment of the important coracocla­
vicular ligament.
In addition, the surfaces and margins of the clavicle are 
roughened by the attachment of muscles that connect the 
clavicle to the thorax, neck, and upper limb. The superior 
surface is smoother than the inferior surface.
Scapula
The scapula is a large, flat triangular bone with:
■	 three angles (lateral, superior, and inferior),
■	 three borders (superior, lateral, and medial),
■	 two surfaces (costal and posterior), and
Fig. 7.20  Right clavicle. 
Lateral
Medial
Superior view
Surface for 
articulation
with acromion
Anterior view
Surface for articulation with 
manubrium of sternum and
first costal cartilage
Trapezoid line
Inferior view
Conoid tubercle
Conoid tubercle
■	 three processes (acromion, spine, and coracoid process) 
(Fig. 7.21).
The lateral angle of the scapula is marked by a shallow, 
somewhat comma-shaped glenoid cavity, which articu­
lates with the head of the humerus to form the glenohu­
meral joint (Fig. 7.21B,C).
A large triangular-shaped roughening (the infragle­
noid tubercle) inferior to the glenoid cavity is the site of 
attachment for the long head of the triceps brachii muscle.
A less distinct supraglenoid tubercle is located supe­
rior to the glenoid cavity and is the site of attachment for 
the long head of the biceps brachii muscle.
A prominent spine subdivides the posterior surface 
of the scapula into a small, superior supraspinous 

=== PAGE 715 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
691
Fig. 7.21  Scapula. A. Posterior view of right scapula. B. Anterior view of costal surface. C. Lateral view. 
Articular surface for clavicle
Coracoid
process
Superior border
Anterior view of scapula
Superior angle
Medial border
Subscapular fossa
Acromion
Glenoid cavity
Lateral border
Infraglenoid tubercle
Inferior angle
A
Acromion
Supraglenoid tubercle
Superior angle
Coracoid process
Glenoid cavity
Infraglenoid tubercle
Inferior angle
Lateral border
Spinous process
Lateral view
C
Medial border
Lateral border
Superior border
Superior angle
Inferior angle
Articular surface for clavicle
Coracoid process
Posterior view
Acromion
Glenoid cavity
Infraglenoid tubercle
Supraspinous
fossa
Suprascapular notch
Greater scapular notch 
(or spinoglenoid notch)
Infraspinous
fossa
Spine of scapula
B

=== PAGE 716 ===
Upper Limb
692
fossa and a much larger, inferior infraspinous fossa 
(Fig. 7.21A).
The acromion, which is an anterolateral projection 
of the spine, arches over the glenohumeral joint and articu­
lates, via a small oval facet on its distal end, with the 
clavicle.
The region between the lateral angle of the scapula and 
the attachment of the spine to the posterior surface of the 
scapula is the greater scapular notch (spinoglenoid 
notch).
Unlike the posterior surface, the costal surface of the 
scapula is unremarkable, being characterized by a shallow 
concave subscapular fossa over much of its extent 
(Fig. 7.21B). The costal surface and margins provide for 
muscle attachment, and the costal surface, together with 
its related muscle (subscapularis), moves freely over the 
underlying thoracic wall.
The lateral border of the scapula is strong and thick for 
muscle attachment, whereas the medial border and much 
of the superior border is thin and sharp.
The superior border is marked on its lateral end by:
■	 the coracoid process, a hook-like structure that pro­
jects anterolaterally and is positioned directly inferior to 
the lateral part of the clavicle; and
■	 the small but distinct suprascapular notch, which 
lies immediately medial to the root of the coracoid 
process.
The spine and acromion can be readily palpated on 
a patient, as can the tip of the coracoid process, the 
inferior angle, and much of the medial border of the 
scapula.
Proximal humerus
The proximal end of the humerus consists of the head, 
the anatomical neck, the greater and lesser tubercles, the 
surgical neck, and the superior half of the shaft of the 
humerus (Fig. 7.22).
The head is half-spherical in shape and projects medi­
ally and somewhat superiorly to articulate with the much 
smaller glenoid cavity of the scapula.
The anatomical neck is very short and is formed by a 
narrow constriction immediately distal to the head. It lies 
between the head and the greater and lesser tubercles lat­
erally, and between the head and the shaft more medially.
Greater and lesser tubercles
The greater and lesser tubercles are prominent land­
marks on the proximal end of the humerus and serve as 
attachment sites for the four rotator cuff muscles of the 
glenohumeral joint.
Fig. 7.22  Proximal end of right humerus. 
Head
Superior facet on 
greater tubercle
(supraspinatus)
Greater
tubercle
Intertubercular
sulcus
Intertubercular
sulcus
Lesser tubercle
(subscapularis)
Lateral lip, floor,
and medial lip of
intertubercular
sulcus (pectoralis
major, latissimus
dorsi, and teres
major, respectively)
Deltoid tuberosity
(deltoid)
Deltoid 
tuberosity
(deltoid)
Anatomical neck
Surgical neck
Lateral view
Anterior view
Attachment
for pectoralis 
major
Attachment for
coracobrachialis
Greater
tubercle
Superior facet
(supraspinatus)
Middle facet
(infraspinatus)
Inferior facet
(teres minor)
Surgical neck
Anatomical
neck
Posterior view
The greater tubercle is lateral in position. Its superior 
surface and posterior surface are marked by three large 
smooth facets for muscle tendon attachments:
■	 The superior facet is for attachment of the supraspina­
tus muscle.
■	 The middle facet is for attachment of the infraspinatus.
■	 The inferior facet is for attachment of the teres minor.
The lesser tubercle is anterior in position and its surface 
is marked by a large smooth impression for attachment of 
the subscapularis muscle.
A deep intertubercular sulcus (bicipital groove) 
separates the lesser and greater tubercles and continues 
inferiorly onto the proximal shaft of the humerus 
(Fig. 7.22). The tendon of the long head of the biceps 
brachii passes through this sulcus.

=== PAGE 717 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
693
In the clinic
Fracture of the proximal humerus
It is extremely rare for fractures to occur across the 
anatomical neck of the humerus because the obliquity of 
such a fracture would have to traverse the thickest region 
of bone. Typically fractures occur around the surgical neck 
of the humerus. Although the axillary nerve and posterior 
circumflex humeral artery may be damaged with this type 
of fracture, this rarely happens. It is important that the 
axillary nerve is tested before relocation to be sure 
that the injury has not damaged the nerve and that 
the treatment itself does not cause a neurological 
deficit.
Joints
The three joints in the shoulder complex are the sternocla­
vicular, acromioclavicular, and glenohumeral joints.
The sternoclavicular joint and the acromioclavicular 
joint link the two bones of the pectoral girdle to each other 
and to the trunk. The combined movements at these two 
joints enable the scapula to be positioned over a wide range 
on the thoracic wall, substantially increasing “reach” by 
the upper limb.
Roughenings on the lateral and medial lips and on the 
floor of the intertubercular sulcus mark sites for the 
attachment of the pectoralis major, teres major, and latis­
simus dorsi muscles, respectively.
The lateral lip of the intertubercular sulcus is continu­
ous inferiorly with a large V-shaped deltoid tuberosity 
on the lateral surface of the humerus midway along its 
length (Fig. 7.22), which is where the deltoid muscle 
inserts onto the humerus.
In approximately the same position, but on the medial 
surface of the bone, there is a thin vertical roughening for 
attachment of the coracobrachialis muscle.
Surgical neck
One of the most important features of the proximal end of 
the humerus is the surgical neck (Fig. 7.22). This region 
is oriented in the horizontal plane between the expanded 
proximal part of the humerus (head, anatomical neck, and 
tubercles) and the narrower shaft. The axillary nerve and 
the posterior circumflex humeral artery, which pass into 
the deltoid region from the axilla, do so immediately poste­
rior to the surgical neck. Because the surgical neck is 
weaker than more proximal regions of the bone, it is one 
of the sites where the humerus commonly fractures. The 
associated nerve (axillary) and artery (posterior circumflex 
humeral) can be damaged by fractures in this region.
The glenohumeral joint (shoulder joint) is the articula­
tion between the humerus of the arm and the scapula.
Sternoclavicular joint
The sternoclavicular joint occurs between the proximal 
end of the clavicle and the clavicular notch of the manu­
brium of  the sternum together with a small part of the 
first costal cartilage (Fig. 7.23). It is synovial and saddle 
shaped. The articular cavity is completely separated into 
two compartments by an articular disc. The sternoclavicu­
lar joint allows movement of the clavicle, predominantly 
in the anteroposterior and vertical planes, although some 
rotation also occurs.
The sternoclavicular joint is surrounded by a joint 
capsule and is reinforced by four ligaments:
■	 The anterior and posterior sternoclavicular liga­
ments are anterior and posterior, respectively, to the 
joint.
Fig. 7.23  Sternoclavicular joint. A. Bones and ligaments. 
B. Volume-rendered reconstruction using multidetector computed 
tomography. 
Costoclavicular
ligament
Interclavicular
ligament
Clavicular notch
Anterior
sternoclavicular
ligament
Manubrium of
sternum
Sternal angle
Articular disc
(capsule and ligaments
removed anteriorly
to  expose joint)
Attachment site
for rib II
First costal
cartilage
Rib I
Vertebral body of TII
Left clavicle
Sternal
angle
Rib I
Rib II
Manubrium
of sternum
A
B

=== PAGE 719 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
695
Fig. 7.25  Glenohumeral joint. A. Articular surfaces of right glenohumeral joint. B. Radiograph of a normal glenohumeral joint. 
Tendon of long
head of biceps
brachii muscle
Glenoid cavity
A
B
Glenoid labrum
Transverse 
humeral ligament
Clavicle
Acromion
Glenoid cavity
Head of humerus
Head of
humerus
Glenohumeral joint
The glenohumeral joint is a synovial ball and socket 
articulation between the head of the humerus and the 
glenoid cavity of the scapula (Fig. 7.25). It is multiaxial 
with a wide range of movements provided at the cost of 
skeletal stability. Joint stability is provided, instead, by the 
rotator cuff muscles, the long head of the biceps brachii 
muscle, related bony processes, and extracapsular liga­
ments. Movements at the joint include flexion, extension, 
abduction, adduction, medial rotation, lateral rotation, 
and circumduction.
The articular surfaces of the glenohumeral joint are the 
large spherical head of the humerus and the small glenoid 
cavity of the scapula (Fig. 7.25). Each of the surfaces is 
covered by hyaline cartilage.
The glenoid cavity is deepened and expanded peripher­
ally by a fibrocartilaginous collar (the glenoid labrum), 
which attaches to the margin of the fossa. Superiorly, this 
labrum is continuous with the tendon of the long head of 
the biceps brachii muscle, which attaches to the supragle­
noid tubercle and passes through the articular cavity 
superior to the head of the humerus.

=== PAGE 720 ===
Upper Limb
696
The synovial membrane attaches to the margins of the 
articular surfaces and lines the fibrous membrane of the 
joint capsule (Fig. 7.26). The synovial membrane is loose 
inferiorly. This redundant region of synovial membrane 
and related fibrous membrane accommodates abduction of 
the arm.
The synovial membrane protrudes through apertures in 
the fibrous membrane to form bursae, which lie between 
the tendons of surrounding muscles and the fibrous mem­
brane. The most consistent of these is the subtendinous 
bursa of  the subscapularis, which lies between the 
subscapularis muscle and the fibrous membrane. The 
synovial membrane also folds around the tendon of the 
long head of the biceps brachii muscle in the joint and 
extends along the tendon as it passes into the intertuber­
cular sulcus. All these synovial structures reduce friction 
between the tendons and adjacent joint capsule and bone.
In addition to bursae that communicate with the articu­
lar cavity through apertures in the fibrous membrane, 
other bursae are associated with the joint but are not 
connected to it. These occur:
■	 between the acromion (or deltoid muscle) and supraspi­
natus muscle (or joint capsule) (the subacromial or 
subdeltoid bursa),
■	 between the acromion and skin,
Fig. 7.26  Synovial membrane and joint capsule of right 
glenohumeral joint. 
Synovial sheath
Synovial
 membrane
Redundant synovial 
membrane in adduction
Subtendinous bursa
 of subscapularis
Long head of
 biceps brachii tendon
Coracohumeral
ligament
Long head of
 biceps brachii
tendon
Fibrous membrane
 of joint capsule
Fig. 7.27  Capsule of right glenohumeral joint. 
Superior glenohumeral ligament
Middle glenohumeral ligament
Inferior
glenohumeral
ligament
Coracohumeral
 ligament
Transverse
humeral
 ligament
Synovial
sheath
Tendon of
long head
of biceps
brachii
Redundant capsule
Aperture for subtendinous
bursa of subscapularis
■	 between the coracoid process and the joint capsule, and
■	 in relationship to tendons of muscles around the joint 
(coracobrachialis, teres major, long head of triceps 
brachii, and latissimus dorsi muscles).
The fibrous membrane of the joint capsule attaches 
to the margin of the glenoid cavity, outside the attachment 
of the glenoid labrum and the long head of the biceps 
brachii muscle, and to the anatomical neck of the humerus 
(Fig. 7.27).
On the humerus, the medial attachment occurs more 
inferiorly than the neck and extends onto the shaft. In this 
region, the fibrous membrane is also loose or folded in the 
anatomical position. This redundant area of the fibrous 
membrane accommodates abduction of the arm.
Openings in the fibrous membrane provide continuity 
of the articular cavity with bursae that occur between the 
joint capsule and surrounding muscles and around the 
tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii muscle in the 
intertubercular sulcus.
The fibrous membrane of the joint capsule is 
thickened:
■	 anterosuperiorly in three locations to form superior, 
middle, and inferior glenohumeral ligaments, 
which pass from the superomedial margin of the glenoid 
cavity to the lesser tubercle and inferiorly related ana­
tomical neck of the humerus (Fig. 7.27);

=== PAGE 721 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
697
Joint stability is provided by surrounding muscle tendons 
and a skeletal arch formed superiorly by the coracoid 
process and acromion and the coraco-acromial ligament 
(Fig. 7.28).
Tendons of the rotator cuff muscles (the supraspinatus, 
infraspinatus, teres minor, and subscapularis muscles) 
blend with the joint capsule and form a musculotendinous 
■	 superiorly between the base of the coracoid process and 
the greater tubercle of the humerus (the coracohu­
meral ligament); and
■	 between the greater and lesser tubercles of the humerus 
(transverse humeral ligament)—this holds the 
tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii muscle in 
the intertubercular sulcus (Fig. 7.27).
Fig. 7.28  Lateral view of right glenohumeral joint and surrounding muscles with proximal end of humerus removed. 
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Teres minor
Teres major
Synovial membrane
Subtendinous bursa
of subscapularis
Long head of biceps brachii tendon
Long head of triceps
brachii
Short head of biceps brachii
and coracobrachialis
Latissimus dorsi
Pectoralis major
Glenoid labrum
 Fibrous membrane
Subscapularis
Deltoid
Acromion
Coracoid process
Coraco-acromial ligament
Glenoid cavity
Subacromial bursa (subdeltoid)

=== PAGE 722 ===
Upper Limb
698
collar that surrounds the posterior, superior, and anterior 
aspects of the glenohumeral joint (Figs. 7.28 and 7.29). 
This cuff of muscles stabilizes and holds the head of the 
humerus in the glenoid cavity of the scapula without 
compromising the arm’s flexibility and range of motion. 
The tendon of the long head of the biceps brachii muscle 
passes superiorly through the joint and restricts upward 
movement of the humeral head on the glenoid cavity.
Fig. 7.29  Magnetic resonance image (T1-weighted) of a normal glenohumeral joint in the sagittal plane. 
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Posterior
Anterior
Clavicle
Acromion
Teres minor
Head of humerus
Coracoid process
Subscapularis
Vascular supply to the glenohumeral joint is predomi­
nantly through branches of the anterior and posterior 
circumflex humeral and suprascapular arteries.
The glenohumeral joint is innervated by branches from 
the posterior cord of the brachial plexus, and from the 
suprascapular, axillary, and lateral pectoral nerves.

=== PAGE 723 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
699
In the clinic
Fractures of the clavicle and dislocations of the 
acromioclavicular and sternoclavicular joints
The clavicle provides the only bony connection between the 
upper limb and trunk. Given its relative size and the potential 
forces that it transmits from the upper limb to the trunk, it is 
not surprising that it is often fractured. The typical site of 
fracture is the middle third (Fig. 7.30). The medial and lateral 
thirds are rarely fractured.
The acromial end of the clavicle tends to dislocate at the 
acromioclavicular joint with trauma (Fig. 7.31). The outer third 
of the clavicle is joined to the scapula by the conoid and 
trapezoid ligaments of the coracoclavicular ligament.
A minor injury tends to tear the fibrous joint capsule and 
ligaments of the acromioclavicular joint, resulting in 
acromioclavicular separation on a plain radiograph. More 
severe trauma will disrupt the conoid and trapezoid 
ligaments of the coracoclavicular ligament, which results in 
elevation and upward subluxation of the clavicle.
The typical injury at the medial end of the clavicle is an 
anterior or posterior dislocation of the sternoclavicular joint. 
Importantly, a posterior dislocation of the clavicle may 
impinge on the great vessels in the root of the neck and 
compress or disrupt them.
Fig. 7.30  There is an oblique fracture of the middle third of the 
right clavicle. 
Fracture of clavicle
Acromioclavicular joint
Fig. 7.31  Radiographs of acromioclavicular joints. A. Normal 
right acromioclavicular joint. B. Dislocated right acromioclavicular 
joint (shoulder separation). 
Acromioclavicular joint
Acromion
Clavicle
 Head of humerus
Clavicle
Acromion
Humerus
A
B

=== PAGE 724 ===
Upper Limb
700
In the clinic
Dislocations of the glenohumeral joint
The glenohumeral joint is extremely mobile, providing a 
wide range of movement at the expense of stability. The 
relatively small bony glenoid cavity, supplemented by 
the less robust fibrocartilaginous glenoid labrum and the 
ligamentous support, make it susceptible to dislocation.
Anterior dislocation (Fig. 7.32) occurs most frequently and 
is usually associated with an isolated traumatic incident 
(clinically, all anterior dislocations are anteroinferior). In some 
cases, the anteroinferior glenoid labrum is torn with or 
without a small bony fragment. Once the joint capsule and 
cartilage are disrupted, the joint is susceptible to further 
(recurrent) dislocations. When an anteroinferior dislocation 
occurs, the axillary nerve may be injured by direct 
compression of the humeral head on the nerve inferiorly as 
it passes through the quadrangular space. Furthermore, the 
“lengthening” effect of the humerus may stretch the radial 
nerve, which is tightly bound within the radial groove, and 
produce a radial nerve paralysis. Occasionally, an 
anteroinferior dislocation is associated with a fracture, which 
may require surgical reduction.
Posterior dislocation is extremely rare; when seen, the 
clinician should focus on its cause, the most common being 
extremely vigorous muscle contractions, which may be 
associated with an epileptic seizure caused by electrocution. 
Treatment of recurrent instability can be challenging. The 
aims of treatment are to maintain function and range of 
movement while preventing instability (subluxation, 
dislocation, and the “feeling” of dislocation). This can be 
achieved through physical therapy and shoulder 
“re-education.” If this fails, capsular tightening and 
stabilization of the labrum can be achieved arthroscopically. 
If the problem persists, the coracoid process can be divided 
at the base, maintaining continuity of the muscular 
attachments. The process is transferred and a screw fixed to 
the anterior inferior border of the glenoid to form a buttress 
to prevent future dislocations.
Fig. 7.32  Radiograph showing an anteroinferior dislocation of 
the shoulder joint. 
Acromion
Glenoid cavity
Clavicle
Head of humerus

=== PAGE 725 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
701
In the clinic
Rotator cuff disorders
The two main disorders of the rotator cuff are impingement 
and tendinopathy. The muscle most commonly involved is 
supraspinatus as it passes beneath the acromion and the 
acromioclavicular ligament. This space, beneath which the 
supraspinatus tendon passes, is of fixed dimensions. 
Swelling of the supraspinatus muscle, excessive fluid within 
the subacromial/subdeltoid bursa, or subacromial bony 
spurs may produce significant impingement when the arm is 
abducted.
The blood supply to the supraspinatus tendon is relatively 
poor. Repeated trauma, in certain circumstances, makes the 
tendon susceptible to degenerative change, which may 
result in calcium deposition, producing extreme pain. The 
calcium deposits can be extracted through a needle under 
image guidance and often have the consistency of 
toothpaste.
When the supraspinatus tendon has undergone significant 
degenerative change, it is more susceptible to trauma, and 
partial- or full-thickness tears may develop (Fig. 7.33). These 
tears are most common in older patients and may result in 
considerable difficulty in carrying out normal activities of 
daily living such as combing hair. However, complete tears 
may be entirely asymptomatic.
Fig. 7.33  Magnetic resonance image of a full-thickness tear of 
the supraspinatus tendon as it inserts onto the greater tubercle 
of the humerus. 
Torn supraspinatus tendon
Humeral head

=== PAGE 726 ===
Upper Limb
702
In the clinic
Inflammation of the subacromial (subdeltoid) bursa
Between the supraspinatus and deltoid muscles laterally 
and the acromion medially, there is a bursa referred to 
clinically as the subacromial or subdeltoid bursa. In 
patients who have injured the shoulder or who have 
supraspinatus tendinopathy, this bursa may become 
inflamed, making movements of the glenohumeral joint 
painful. These inflammatory changes may be treated by 
injection of a corticosteroid and local anesthetic agent 
(Fig. 7.34).
Fig. 7.34  Ultrasound of shoulder showing needle placement 
into the subdeltoid/subacromial bursa. 
Deltoid
Head of humerus
Needle
Subacromial-
subdeltoid bursa
Muscles
The two most superficial muscles of the shoulder are the 
trapezius and deltoid muscles (Fig. 7.35 and Table 7.1). 
Together, they provide the characteristic contour of the 
shoulder:
■	 The trapezius attaches the scapula and clavicle to the 
trunk.
■	 The deltoid attaches the scapula and clavicle to the 
humerus.
Fig. 7.35  Lateral view of trapezius and deltoid muscles. 
Acromion
Spine of the
scapula
Trapezius
Deltoid
Deltoid tuberosity of humerus
Clavicle

=== PAGE 727 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Shoulder
7
703
C4 (Fig. 7.36). These nerves pass vertically along the deep 
surface of the muscle. The accessory nerve can be evalu­
ated by testing the function of the trapezius muscle. This is 
most easily done by asking patients to shrug their shoulders 
against resistance.
Deltoid
The deltoid muscle is large and triangular in shape, 
with its base attached to the scapula and clavicle and 
its apex attached to the humerus (Fig. 7.36). It origi­
nates along a continuous U-shaped line of attachment 
to the clavicle and the scapula, mirroring the adjacent 
insertion sites of the trapezius muscle. It inserts into the 
deltoid tuberosity on the lateral surface of the shaft of the 
humerus.
The major function of the deltoid muscle is abduction 
of the arm.
The deltoid muscle is innervated by the axillary nerve, 
which is a branch of the posterior cord of the brachial 
plexus. The axillary nerve and associated blood vessels (the 
posterior circumflex humeral artery and vein) enter the 
deltoid by passing posteriorly around the surgical neck of 
the humerus.
Levator scapulae
The levator scapulae originates from the transverse proc­
esses of CI to CIV vertebrae (Fig. 7.36). It descends laterally 
Both the trapezius and deltoid are attached to opposing 
surfaces and margins of the spine of the scapula, acromion, 
and clavicle. The scapula, acromion, and clavicle can be 
palpated between the attachments of the trapezius and 
deltoid.
Deep to the trapezius the scapula is attached to the 
vertebral column by three muscles—the levator scapulae, 
rhomboid minor, and rhomboid major. These three muscles 
work with the trapezius (and with muscles found anteri­
orly) to position the scapula on the trunk.
Trapezius
The trapezius muscle has an extensive origin from the 
axial skeleton, which includes sites on the skull and the 
vertebrae, from CI to TXII (Fig. 7.36). From CI to CVII, 
the muscle attaches to the vertebrae through the liga­
mentum nuchae. The muscle inserts onto the skeletal 
framework of the shoulder along the inner margins of a 
continuous U-shaped line of attachment oriented in the 
horizontal plane, with the bottom of the U directed laterally. 
Together, the left and right trapezius muscles form a diamond 
or trapezoid shape, from which the name is derived.
The trapezius muscle is a powerful elevator of the 
shoulder and also rotates the scapula to extend the reach 
superiorly.
Innervation of the trapezius muscle is by the accessory 
nerve [XI] and the anterior rami of cervical nerves C3 and 
Table 7.1  Muscles of the shoulder (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Trapezius
Superior nuchal line, external 
occipital protuberance, medial 
margin of the ligamentum 
nuchae, spinous processes 
of CVII to TXII and the related 
supraspinous ligaments
Superior edge of the crest of 
the spine of the scapula, 
acromion, posterior border of 
lateral one-third of clavicle
Motor spinal part of accessory 
nerve (XI). Sensory 
(proprioception) anterior rami 
of C3 and C4
Powerful elevator of the scapula; 
rotates the scapula during 
abduction of humerus above 
horizontal; middle fibers retract 
scapula; lower fibers depress 
scapula
Deltoid
Inferior edge of the crest 
of the spine of the scapula, 
lateral margin of the acromion, 
anterior border 
of lateral one-third of clavicle
Deltoid tuberosity of humerus
Axillary nerve (C5, C6)
Major abductor of arm; clavicular 
fibers assist in flexing the arm; 
posterior fibers assist in extending 
the arm
Levator 
scapulae
Transverse processes of CI 
and CII vertebrae and posterior 
tubercles of transverse 
processes of CIII and CIV 
vertebrae
Posterior surface of medial 
border of scapula from 
superior angle to root of 
spine of the scapula
Branches directly from 
anterior rami of C3 and C4 
spinal nerves and by branches 
(C5) from the dorsal scapular 
nerve
Elevates the scapula
Rhomboid 
minor
Lower end of ligamentum 
nuchae and spinous processes 
of CVII and TI vertebrae
Posterior surface of medial 
border of scapula at the root 
of the spine of the scapula
Dorsal scapular nerve (C4, C5)
Elevates and retracts the scapula
Rhomboid 
major
Spinous processes of TII–TV 
vertebrae and intervening 
supraspinous ligaments
Posterior surface of medial 
border of scapula from the 
root of the spine of the 
scapula to the inferior angle
Dorsal scapular nerve 
(C4, C5)
Elevates and retracts the scapula

=== PAGE 728 ===
Upper Limb
704
Fig. 7.36  Attachments and neurovascular supply of the trapezius and deltoid muscles. 
Acromion
Spine of scapula
Trapezius
Deltoid
Deltoid tuberosity 
of humerus
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Clavicle
Superior nuchal line
External occipital
protuberance
Mastoid process
Ligamentum nuchae
Spinous processes and interspinous 
ligaments to TXII
Accessory nerve (XI)
Levator scapulae
Axillary nerve
Posterior circumflex 
humeral artery
Line of attachment of trapezius
Line of attachment of deltoid
to attach to the posterior surface of the medial border of 
the scapula from the superior angle to the smooth triangu­
lar area of bone at the root of the spine.
The levator scapulae muscle is innervated by the dorsal 
scapular nerve and directly from C3 and C4 spinal nerves.
The levator scapulae elevates the scapula.
Rhomboid minor and major
The rhomboid minor and major muscles attach medially to 
the vertebral column and descend laterally to attach to the 
medial border of the scapula inferior to the levator scapulae 
muscle (Fig. 7.36).
The rhomboid minor originates from the lower end of 
the ligamentum nuchae and the spines of CVII and TI 
vertebrae. It inserts laterally into the smooth triangular 
area of bone at the root of the spine of the scapula on the 
posterior surface.
The rhomboid major originates from the spines of ver­
tebrae TII to TV and from the intervening supraspinous 
ligaments. It descends laterally to insert along the posterior 
surface of the medial border of the scapula from the inser­
tion of the rhomboid minor to the inferior angle.
The rhomboid muscles are innervated by the dorsal 
scapular nerve, which is a branch of the brachial plexus.

=== PAGE 729 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Scapular Region
7
705
The posterior scapular region also contains part of one 
additional muscle, the long head of the triceps brachii, 
which passes between the scapula and the proximal end of 
the forearm. This muscle, along with other muscles of the 
region and the humerus, participates in forming a number 
of spaces through which nerves and vessels enter and leave 
the region.
The supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor 
muscles are components of the rotator cuff, which stabi­
lizes the glenohumeral joint.
The rhomboid minor and major retract and elevate the 
scapula.
POSTERIOR SCAPULAR REGION
The posterior scapular region occupies the posterior aspect 
of the scapula and is located deep to the trapezius and 
deltoid muscles (Fig. 7.37 and Table 7.2). It contains four 
muscles, which pass between the scapula and proximal end 
of the humerus: the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, teres 
minor, and teres major muscles.
Fig. 7.37  Right posterior scapular region. 
Suprascapular notch (foramen) 
Supraspinatus
Infraspinatus
Cut edge of trapezius
Cut edge of deltoid
Surgical neck of humerus
Medial lip of 
intertubercular sulcus
Triangular interval
Triangular space
Olecranon
Long head of triceps brachii
Teres major
Teres minor
Quadrangular space
Cut edge of lateral head of triceps brachii

=== PAGE 730 ===
Upper Limb
706
scapula (Fig. 7.37). This broad cord-like muscle passes 
superiorly and laterally and ends as a flat tendon that 
attaches to the medial lip of the intertubercular sulcus on 
the anterior surface of the humerus. The teres major medi­
ally rotates and extends the humerus.
Long head of triceps brachii
The long head of  the triceps brachii muscle originates 
from the infraglenoid tubercle and passes somewhat 
vertically down the arm to insert, with the medial and 
lateral heads of this muscle, on the olecranon of the ulna 
(Fig. 7.37).
The triceps brachii is the primary extensor of the 
forearm at the elbow joint. Because the long head crosses 
the glenohumeral joint, it can also extend and adduct the 
humerus.
The importance of the triceps brachii in the posterior 
scapular region is that its vertical course between the teres 
minor and teres major, together with these muscles and the 
humerus, forms spaces through which nerves and vessels 
pass between regions.
Gateways to the posterior scapular region
Suprascapular foramen
The suprascapular foramen is the route through which 
structures pass between the base of the neck and the pos­
terior scapular region (Fig. 7.37). It is formed by the 
suprascapular notch of the scapula and the superior 
transverse scapular (suprascapular) ligament, which con­
verts the notch into a foramen.
Muscles
Supraspinatus and infraspinatus
The supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles originate 
from two large fossae, one above and one below the spine, 
on the posterior surface of the scapula (Fig. 7.37). They 
form tendons that insert on the greater tubercle of the 
humerus.
■	 The tendon of the supraspinatus passes under the 
acromion, where it is separated from the bone by a 
subacromial bursa, passes over the glenohumeral joint, 
and inserts on the superior facet of the greater 
tubercle.
■	 The tendon of the infraspinatus passes posteriorly to the 
glenohumeral joint and inserts on the middle facet of 
the greater tubercle.
The supraspinatus participates in abduction of the arm. 
The infraspinatus laterally rotates the humerus.
Teres minor and teres major
The teres minor muscle is a cord-like muscle that origi­
nates from a flattened area of the scapula immediately 
adjacent to its lateral border below the infraglenoid 
tubercle (Fig. 7.37). Its tendon inserts on the inferior facet 
of the greater tubercle of the humerus. The teres minor 
laterally rotates the humerus and is a component of the 
rotator cuff.
The teres major muscle originates from a large oval 
region on the posterior surface of the inferior angle of the 
Table 7.2  Muscles of the posterior scapular region (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Supraspinatus
Medial two-thirds of the 
supraspinous fossa of the scapula 
and the deep fascia that covers 
the muscle
Most superior facet on the greater 
tubercle of the humerus
Suprascapular nerve 
(C5, C6)
Rotator cuff muscle; participates 
in abduction of the glenohumeral 
joint; stabilization of 
glenohumeral joint
Infraspinatus
Medial two-thirds of the 
infraspinous fossa of the scapula 
and the deep fascia that covers 
the muscle
Middle facet on posterior surface 
of the greater tubercle of the 
humerus
Suprascapular nerve 
(C5, C6)
Rotator cuff muscle; lateral 
rotation of arm at the 
glenohumeral joint; stabilization 
of glenohumeral joint
Teres minor
Upper two-thirds of a flattened 
strip of bone on the posterior 
surface of the scapula immediately 
adjacent to the lateral border of 
the scapula
Inferior facet on the posterior 
surface of the greater tubercle of 
the humerus
Axillary nerve 
(C5, C6)
Rotator cuff muscle; lateral 
rotation of arm at the 
glenohumeral joint; stabilization 
of glenohumeral joint
Teres major
Elongate oval area on the 
posterior surface of the inferior
angle of the scapula
Medial lip of the intertubercular 
sulcus on the anterior surface of 
the humerus
Inferior subscapular 
nerve (C5, C6, C7)
Medial rotation and extension of 
the arm at the glenohumeral joint; 
stabilization of glenohumeral joint
Long head of 
triceps brachii
Infraglenoid tubercle on scapula
Common tendon of insertion with 
medial and lateral heads on the 
olecranon process of ulna
Radial nerve 
(C6, C7, C8)
Extension of the forearm at the 
elbow joint; accessory adductor 
and extensor of the arm at the 
glenohumeral joint

=== PAGE 731 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Scapular Region
7
707
axilla) and the posterior scapular region (Fig. 7.37). In the 
posterior scapular region, its boundaries are formed by:
■	 the inferior margin of the teres minor,
■	 the surgical neck of the humerus,
■	 the superior margin of the teres major, and
■	 the lateral margin of the long head of the triceps brachii.
The axillary nerve and the posterior circumflex humeral 
artery and vein pass through this space (Fig. 7.38).
The suprascapular nerve passes through the supra­
scapular foramen; the suprascapular artery and the 
suprascapular vein follow the same course as the nerve, 
but normally pass immediately superior to the superior 
transverse scapular ligament and not through the foramen 
(Fig. 7.38).
Quadrangular space (from posterior)
The quadrangular space provides a passageway for nerves 
and vessels passing between more anterior regions (the 
Fig. 7.38  Arteries and nerves associated with gateways in the posterior scapular region. 
Posterior circumflex humeral artery
Circumflex scapular artery
Superior transverse scapular ligament
Suprascapular nerve
Suprascapular artery
Axillary nerve
Profunda brachii artery
Radial nerve
To deltoid
To skin on lateral part of deltoid
Cut edge of lateral head of triceps brachii 

=== PAGE 732 ===
Upper Limb
708
Triangular space
The triangular space is an area of communication between 
the axilla and the posterior scapular region (Fig. 7.37). 
When viewed from the posterior scapular region, the trian­
gular space is formed by:
■	 the medial margin of the long head of the triceps brachii,
■	 the superior margin of the teres major, and
■	 the inferior margin of the teres minor.
The circumflex scapular artery and vein pass through 
this gap (Fig. 7.38).
Triangular interval
The triangular interval is formed by:
■	 the lateral margin of the long head of the triceps brachii,
■	 the shaft of the humerus, and
■	 the inferior margin of the teres major (Fig. 7.37).
Because this space is below the inferior margin of the 
teres major, which defines the inferior boundary of the 
axilla, the triangular interval serves as a passageway 
between the anterior and posterior compartments of the 
arm and between the posterior compartment of the arm 
and the axilla. The radial nerve, the profunda brachii 
artery (deep artery of  arm), and associated veins pass 
through it (Fig. 7.38).
Nerves
The two major nerves of the posterior scapular region are 
the suprascapular and axillary nerves, both of which 
originate from the brachial plexus in the axilla (Fig. 7.38).
Suprascapular nerve
The suprascapular nerve originates in the base of the 
neck from the superior trunk of the brachial plexus. It 
passes posterolaterally from its origin, through the 
suprascapular foramen to reach the posterior scapular 
region, where it lies in the plane between bone and muscle 
(Fig. 7.38).
It innervates the supraspinatus muscle and then passes 
through the greater scapular (spinoglenoid) notch, 
between the root of the spine of the scapula and the 
glenoid cavity, to terminate in and innervate the infraspi­
natus muscle.
Generally, the suprascapular nerve has no cutaneous 
branches.
Axillary nerve
The axillary nerve originates from the posterior cord of 
the brachial plexus. It exits the axilla by passing through 
the quadrangular space in the posterior wall of the axilla, 
and enters the posterior scapular region (Fig. 7.38). 
Together with the posterior circumflex humeral artery and 
vein, it is directly related to the posterior surface of the 
surgical neck of the humerus.
The axillary nerve innervates the deltoid and teres 
minor muscles. In addition, it has a cutaneous branch, the 
superior lateral cutaneous nerve of the arm, which carries 
general sensation from the skin over the inferior part of the 
deltoid muscle.
Arteries and veins
Three major arteries are found in the posterior scapular 
region: the suprascapular, posterior circumflex humeral, 
and circumflex scapular arteries. These arteries contribute 

=== PAGE 733 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Scapular Region
7
709
Fig. 7.39  Arterial anastomoses around the shoulder. 
Clavicle
Posterior circumflex
humeral artery
Anterior circumflex
humeral artery
Subscapular artery
Circumflex scapular artery
Suprascapular artery
Axillary artery
Profunda brachii artery
Brachial artery
Right subclavian artery
Deep branch of transverse
cervical artery
Transverse cervical artery
Rib I
Right common carotid artery
Thyrocervical trunk
to an interconnected vascular network around the scapula 
(Fig. 7.39).
In the clinic
Quadrangular space syndrome
Hypertrophy of the quadrangular space muscles or fibrosis 
of the muscle edges may impinge on the axillary nerve. 
Uncommonly, this produces weakness of the deltoid 
muscle. Typically it produces atrophy of the teres minor 
muscle, which may affect the control that the rotator cuff 
muscles exert on shoulder movement.
Suprascapular artery
The suprascapular artery originates in the base of the 
neck as a branch of the thyrocervical trunk, which, in 
turn, is a major branch of the subclavian artery (Figs. 7.38 
and 7.39). The vessel may also originate directly from the 
third part of the subclavian artery.
The suprascapular artery normally enters the posterior 
scapular region superior to the suprascapular foramen, 
whereas the nerve passes through the foramen. In the 
posterior scapular region, the vessel runs with the supra­
scapular nerve.

=== PAGE 734 ===
Upper Limb
710
In addition to supplying the supraspinatus and infra­
spinatus muscles, the suprascapular artery contributes 
branches to numerous structures along its course.
Posterior circumflex humeral artery
The posterior circumflex humeral artery originates 
from the third part of the axillary artery in the axilla (Figs. 
7.38 and 7.39).
The posterior circumflex humeral artery and axillary 
nerve leave the axilla through the quadrangular space in 
the posterior wall and enter the posterior scapular region. 
The vessel supplies the related muscles and the glenohu­
meral joint.
Circumflex scapular artery
The circumflex scapular artery is a branch of the 
subscapular artery that also originates from the third part 
of the axillary artery in the axilla (Figs. 7.38 and 7.39). 
The cir­cumflex scapular artery leaves the axilla through 
the triangular space and enters the posterior scapular 
region, passes through the origin of the teres minor muscle, 
and forms anastomotic connections with other arteries in 
the region.
Veins
Veins in the posterior scapular region generally follow the 
arteries and connect with vessels in the neck, back, arm, 
and axilla.
AXILLA
The axilla is the gateway to the upper limb, providing 
an area of transition between the neck and the arm 
(Fig. 7.40A). Formed by the clavicle, the scapula, the upper 
Lateral wall
Anterior wall
Posterior wall
Skin
Medial wall
Coracoid process
Anterior scalene muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Clavicle
Lateral margin of rib I
A
Fig. 7.40  Axilla. A. Walls and transition between neck and arm.

=== PAGE 735 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
711
Axillary sheath
surrounding
arteries, veins, 
nerves, and 
lymphatics
Apex of inlet
Inlet
Axilla
Skin of arm
Skin on floor of axilla
Posterior wall
• Subscapularis, 
  teres major, and 
  latissimus dorsi 
  muscles, and 
  long head of triceps
  brachii muscle
Lateral wall
• Intertubercular 
  sulcus
Inlet
• Lateral margin of rib I
• Clavicle
• Superior margin of 
   scapula to coracoid process
Anterior wall
• Pectoralis major and 
  minor muscles
• Subclavius muscle
• Clavipectoral fascia
Medial wall
• Upper thoracic wall 
• Serratus anterior muscle
Floor 
• Skin of armpit
• Opens laterally into arm
B
C
Axilla. B. Boundaries. C. Continuity with the arm. 
Fig. 7.40, cont’d

=== PAGE 736 ===
Upper Limb
712
Table 7.3  Muscles of the anterior wall of the axilla (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Pectoralis 
major
Clavicular head—anterior surface of 
medial half of clavicle; sternocostal 
head—anterior surface of sternum; 
first seven costal cartilages; sternal 
end of sixth rib; aponeurosis of 
external oblique
Lateral lip of intertubercular 
sulcus of humerus
Medial and lateral pectoral 
nerves; clavicular head (C5, 
C6); sternocostal head (C6, 
C7, C8, T1)
Flexion, adduction, and medial 
rotation of arm at glenohumeral 
joint; clavicular head—flexion of 
extended arm; sternocostal 
head—extension of flexed arm
Subclavius
First rib at junction between rib and 
costal cartilage
Groove on inferior surface of 
middle one-third 
of clavicle
Nerve to subclavius 
(C5, C6)
Pulls tip of shoulder down; 
pulls clavicle medially to stabilize 
sternoclavicular joint
Pectoralis 
minor
Anterior surfaces and superior 
borders of ribs III to V; and from 
deep fascia overlying the related 
intercostal spaces
Coracoid process of scapula 
(medial border and 
upper surface)
Medial pectoral nerve 
(C5, C6, C7, C8, T1)
Pulls tip of shoulder down; 
protracts scapula
thoracic wall, the humerus, and related muscles, the axilla 
is an irregularly shaped pyramidal space with:
■	 four sides,
■	 an inlet, and
■	 a floor (base) (Fig. 7.40A,B).
The axillary inlet is continuous superiorly with the 
neck, and the lateral part of the floor opens into the arm.
All major structures passing into and out of the upper 
limb pass through the axilla (Fig. 7.40C). Apertures formed 
between muscles in the anterior and posterior walls enable 
structures to pass between the axilla and immediately 
adjacent regions (the posterior scapular, pectoral, and 
deltoid regions).
Axillary inlet
The axillary inlet is oriented in the horizontal plane and is 
somewhat triangular in shape, with its apex directed later­
ally (Fig. 7.40A,B). The margins of the inlet are completely 
formed by bone:
■	 The medial margin is the lateral border of rib I.
■	 The anterior margin is the posterior surface of the 
clavicle.
■	 The posterior margin is the superior border of the 
scapula up to the coracoid process.
The apex of the triangularly shaped axillary inlet is 
lateral in position and is formed by the medial aspect of the 
coracoid process.
Major vessels and nerves pass between the neck and the 
axilla by crossing over the lateral border of rib I and 
through the axillary inlet (Fig. 7.40A).
The subclavian artery, the major blood vessel supplying 
the upper limb, becomes the axillary artery as it crosses the 
lateral margin of rib I and enters the axilla. Similarly, 
the axillary vein becomes the subclavian vein as it passes 
over the lateral margin of rib I and leaves the axilla to enter 
the neck.
At the axillary inlet, the axillary vein is anterior to the 
axillary artery, which, in turn, is anterior to the trunks of 
the brachial plexus.
The inferior trunk (lower trunk) of the brachial plexus 
lies directly on rib I in the neck, as does the subclavian 
artery and vein. As they pass over rib I, the vein and artery 
are separated by the insertion of the anterior scalene 
muscle (Fig. 7.40A).
Anterior wall
The anterior wall of the axilla is formed by the lateral part 
of the pectoralis major muscle, the underlying pectoralis 
minor and subclavius muscles, and the clavipectoral fascia 
(Table 7.3).

=== PAGE 737 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
713
Acting together, the two heads of the pectoralis major 
flex, adduct, and medially rotate the arm at the glenohu­
meral joint. The clavicular head flexes the arm from an 
extended position, whereas the sternocostal head extends 
the arm from a flexed position, particularly against 
resistance.
The pectoralis major is innervated by the lateral and 
medial pectoral nerves, which originate from the brachial 
plexus in the axilla.
Subclavius
The subclavius muscle is a small muscle that lies deep 
to the pectoralis major muscle and passes between the 
clavicle and rib I (Fig. 7.42). It originates medially, as a 
tendon, from rib I at the junction between the rib and its 
costal cartilage. It passes laterally and superiorly to insert 
via a muscular attachment into an elongate shallow 
groove on the inferior surface of the middle third of the 
clavicle.
The function of the subclavius is not entirely clear, but 
it may act to pull the shoulder down by depressing the 
Pectoralis major
The pectoralis major muscle is the largest and most 
superficial muscle of the anterior wall (Fig. 7.41). Its 
inferior margin underlies the anterior axillary fold, which 
marks the anteroinferior border of the axilla. The muscle 
has two heads:
■	 The clavicular head originates from the medial half of 
the clavicle.
■	 The sternocostal head originates from the medial part 
of the anterior thoracic wall—often, fibers from this 
head continue inferiorly and medially to attach to the 
anterior abdominal wall, forming an additional abdomi­
nal part of the muscle.
The muscle inserts into the lateral lip of the intertuber­
cular sulcus of the humerus. The parts of the muscle that 
have a superior origin on the trunk insert lower and more 
anteriorly on the lateral lip of the intertubercular sulcus 
than the parts of the muscle that originate inferiorly.
Fig. 7.41  Pectoralis major muscle. 
Deltoid
Clavipectoral triangle
Clavicular head
Pectoralis major
Sternocostal part
Cephalic vein
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII

=== PAGE 738 ===
Upper Limb
714
Fig. 7.42  Pectoralis minor and subclavius muscles and clavipectoral fascia. 
Pectoralis major
Pectoralis major
Pectoralis minor
Clavipectoral fascia
Cephalic vein
Lateral pectoral nerve
Medial pectoral
nerves
Pectoral branch of thoraco-acromial artery
Subclavius
Attachment of fascia
to floor of axilla
clavicle and may also stabilize the sternoclavicular joint by 
pulling the clavicle medially.
The subclavius muscle is innervated by a small branch 
from the superior trunk of the brachial plexus.
Pectoralis minor
The pectoralis minor muscle is a small triangular-shaped 
muscle that lies deep to the pectoralis major muscle and 
passes from the thoracic wall to the coracoid process of the 
scapula (Fig. 7.42). It originates as three muscular slips 
from the anterior surfaces and upper margins of ribs III to 
V and from the fascia overlying muscles of the related 
intercostal spaces. The muscle fibers pass superiorly and 
laterally to insert into the medial and upper aspects of the 
coracoid process.
The pectoralis minor muscle protracts the scapula (by 
pulling the scapula anteriorly on the thoracic wall) and 
depresses the lateral angle of the scapula.
The pectoralis minor is innervated by the medial pecto­
ral nerve, which originates from the brachial plexus in 
the axilla.
Clavipectoral fascia
The clavipectoral fascia is a thick sheet of connective 
tissue that connects the clavicle to the floor of the axilla 
(Fig. 7.42). It encloses the subclavius and pectoralis minor 
muscles and spans the gap between them.
Structures travel between the axilla and the anterior 
wall of the axilla by passing through the clavipectoral 

=== PAGE 739 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
715
Medial wall
The medial wall of the axilla consists of the upper thoracic 
wall (the ribs and related intercostal tissues) and the 
serratus anterior muscle (Fig. 7.43 and Table 7.4, and see 
Fig. 7.40).
Serratus anterior
The serratus anterior muscle originates as a number of 
muscular slips from the lateral surfaces of ribs I to IX and 
the intervening deep fascia overlying the related intercostal 
spaces (Fig. 7.43). The muscle forms a flattened sheet, 
which passes posteriorly around the thoracic wall to insert 
fascia either between the pectoralis minor and subclavius 
muscles or inferior to the pectoralis minor muscle.
Important structures that pass between the subclavius 
and pectoralis minor muscles include the cephalic vein, the 
thoraco-acromial artery, and the lateral pectoral nerve.
The lateral thoracic artery leaves the axilla by passing 
through the fascia inferior to the pectoralis minor muscle.
The medial pectoral nerve leaves the axilla by penetrat­
ing directly through the pectoralis minor muscle to supply 
this muscle and to reach the pectoralis major muscle. 
Occasionally, branches of the medial pectoral nerve pass 
around the lower margin of the pectoralis minor to reach 
and innervate the overlying pectoralis major muscle.
Fig. 7.43  Medial wall of the axilla. A. Lateral view. B. Lateral view with lateral angle of scapula retracted posteriorly. C. Anterior view. 
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
Long thoracic nerve
Long thoracic nerve
Lateral angle of
scapula pulled
posterolaterally
away from the
thoracic wall
Intercostobrachial nerve
 (lateral cutaneous
branch of T2)
Serratus anterior
Serratus anterior
Serratus anterior
A
B
C

=== PAGE 740 ===
Upper Limb
716
Table 7.4  Muscle of the medial wall of the axilla (spinal segment in bold is the major segment innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Serratus anterior
Lateral surfaces of upper 8–9 
ribs and deep fascia overlying 
the related intercostal spaces
Costal surface of medial 
border of scapula
Long thoracic nerve 
(C5, C6, C7)
Protraction and rotation of the 
scapula; keeps medial border 
and inferior angle of scapula 
opposed to thoracic wall
primarily on the costal surface of the medial border of the 
scapula.
The serratus anterior pulls the scapula forward over the 
thoracic wall and facilitates scapular rotation. It also keeps 
the costal surface of the scapula closely opposed to the 
thoracic wall.
The serratus anterior is innervated by the long thoracic 
nerve, which is derived from the roots of the brachial 
plexus, passes through the axilla along the medial wall, 
and passes vertically down the serratus anterior muscle on 
its external surface, just deep to skin and superficial fascia.
Intercostobrachial nerve
The only major structure that passes directly through the 
medial wall and into the axilla is the intercostobrachial 
nerve (Fig. 7.43). This nerve is the lateral cutaneous 
branch of the second intercostal nerve (anterior ramus of 
T2). It communicates with a branch of the brachial plexus 
(the medial cutaneous nerve of the arm) in the axilla and 
supplies skin on the upper posteromedial side of the arm, 
which is part of the T2 dermatome.
In the clinic
”Winging” of the scapula
Because the long thoracic nerve passes down the lateral 
thoracic wall on the external surface of the serratus 
anterior muscle, just deep to skin and subcutaneous 
fascia, it is vulnerable to damage. Loss of function of this 
muscle causes the medial border, and particularly the 
inferior angle, of the scapula to elevate away from 
the thoracic wall, resulting in characteristic “winging” 
of the scapula, on pushing forward with the arm. 
Furthermore, normal elevation at the arm is no longer 
possible.
Fig. 7.44  Lateral wall of the axilla. 
Teres major
Intertubercular sulcus 
Pectoralis
major
Latissimus dorsi
Lateral wall
The lateral wall of the axilla is narrow and formed entirely 
by the intertubercular sulcus of the humerus (Fig. 7.44). 
The pectoralis major muscle of the anterior wall attaches 
to the lateral lip of the intertubercular sulcus. The latissi­
mus dorsi and teres major muscles of the posterior wall 

=== PAGE 741 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
717
■	 the distal parts of the latissimus dorsi and teres major 
muscles (which pass into the wall from the back and 
posterior scapular region), and
■	 the proximal part of the long head of the triceps brachii 
muscle (which passes vertically down the wall and into 
the arm).
Gaps between the muscles of the posterior wall form 
apertures through which structures pass between the 
axilla, posterior scapular region, and posterior compart­
ment of the arm.
attach to the floor and medial lip of the intertubercular 
sulcus, respectively (Table 7.5).
Posterior wall
The posterior wall of the axilla is complex (Fig. 7.45 and 
see Fig. 7.50). Its bone framework is formed by the costal 
surface of the scapula. Muscles of the wall are:
■	 the subscapularis muscle (associated with the costal 
surface of the scapula),
Table 7.5  Muscles of the lateral and posterior wall of the axilla (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle; 
spinal segments in parentheses do not consistently innervate the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Subscapularis
Medial two-thirds of subscapular 
fossa
Lesser tubercle of humerus
Upper and lower 
subscapular nerves 
(C5, C6, (C7))
Rotator cuff muscle; medial 
rotation of the arm 
at the glenohumeral joint
Teres major
Elongate oval area on the 
posterior surface of the inferior 
angle of the scapula
Medial lip of the intertubercular 
sulcus on the anterior surface of 
the humerus
Lower subscapular 
nerve (C5, C6, C7)
Medial rotation and extension 
of the arm at the glenohumeral 
joint
Latissimus dorsi
Spinous processes of lower six 
thoracic vertebrae and related 
interspinous ligaments; via the 
thoracolumbar fascia to the 
spinous processes of the lumbar 
vertebrae, related interspinous 
ligaments, and iliac crest; lower 
3–4 ribs
Floor of intertubercular sulcus
Thoracodorsal nerve 
(C6, C7, C8)
Adduction, medial rotation, 
and extension of the arm 
at the glenohumeral joint
Long head of 
triceps brachii
Infraglenoid tubercle on scapula
Common tendon of insertion with 
medial and lateral heads on the 
olecranon process of ulna
Radial nerve 
(C6, C7, C8)
Extension of the forearm 
at the elbow joint; accessory 
adductor and extensor of the 
arm at the glenohumeral joint

=== PAGE 742 ===
Upper Limb
718
Fig. 7.45  Posterior wall of the axilla. 
Teres major
Latissimus dorsi
Long head of triceps brachii
Subscapularis
Suprascapular foramen
• Suprascapular nerve
Triangular interval 
• Radial nerve 
• Profunda brachii artery
Triangular space 
• Circumflex scapular artery
Quadrangular space 
• Axillary nerve 
• Posterior circumflex humeral
  artery and vein

=== PAGE 743 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
719
Subscapularis
The subscapularis muscle forms the largest component 
of the posterior wall of the axilla. It originates from, and 
fills, the subscapular fossa and inserts on the lesser tubercle 
of the humerus (Figs. 7.45 and 7.46). The tendon crosses 
immediately anterior to the joint capsule of the glenohu­
meral joint.
Together with three muscles of the posterior scapular 
region (the supraspinatus, infraspinatus, and teres minor 
muscles), the subscapularis is a member of the rotator cuff 
muscle group, which stabilizes the glenohumeral joint.
The subscapularis is innervated by branches of the 
brachial plexus (the superior and inferior subscapular 
nerves), which originate in the axilla.
Teres major and latissimus dorsi
The inferolateral aspect of the posterior wall of the axilla 
is formed by the terminal part of the teres major muscle 
and the tendon of the latissimus dorsi muscle (Fig. 7.45). 
These two structures lie under the posterior axillary fold, 
which marks the posteroinferior border of the axilla.
The flat tendon of the latissimus dorsi muscle curves 
around the inferior margin of the teres major muscle on 
Fig. 7.46  Magnetic resonance image of the glenohumeral joint in 
the transverse or horizontal plane. 
Glenoid cavity
Biceps tendon in intertubercular sulcus
Subscapularis
Glenoid labrum
Teres minor and infraspinatus muscles
Head of humerus
Anterior
Posterior
the posterior wall to insert into the floor of the intertuber­
cular sulcus of the humerus, anterior to and slightly above 
the most distal attachment of the teres major muscle to 
the medial lip of the intertubercular sulcus. As a conse­
quence, the inferior margin of the teres major muscle 
defines the inferior limit of the axilla laterally.
The axillary artery becomes the brachial artery of the 
arm as it crosses the inferior margin of the teres major 
muscle.
Long head of the triceps brachii
The long head of  the triceps brachii muscle passes 
vertically through the posterior wall of the axilla, and, 
together with surrounding muscles and adjacent bones, 
results in the formation of three apertures through which 
major structures pass through the posterior wall:
■	 the quadrangular space,
■	 the triangular space, and
■	 the triangular interval (Fig. 7.45).
Gateways in the posterior wall
(See also “Gateways to the posterior scapular region,” pp. 
706–710, and Figs. 7.37 and 7.38.)
Quadrangular space
The quadrangular space provides a passageway for nerves 
and vessels passing between the axilla and the more poste­
rior scapular and deltoid regions (Fig. 7.45). When viewed 
from anteriorly, its boundaries are formed by:
■	 the inferior margin of the subscapularis muscle,
■	 the surgical neck of the humerus,
■	 the superior margin of the teres major muscle, and
■	 the lateral margin of the long head of the triceps brachii 
muscle.
Passing through the quadrangular space are the axil­
lary nerve and the posterior circumflex humeral artery 
and vein.
Triangular space
The triangular space is an area of communication 
between the axilla and the posterior scapular region 
(Fig. 7.45). When viewed from anteriorly, it is formed by:
■	 the medial margin of the long head of the triceps brachii 
muscle,
■	 the superior margin of the teres major muscle, and
■	 the inferior margin of the subscapularis muscle.

=== PAGE 744 ===
Upper Limb
720
Fig. 7.47  Floor of the axilla. 
Axillary sheath
Arm
Dome of skin on
floor of axilla
Anterior axillary skin fold
Posterior axillary
skin fold
The circumflex scapular artery and vein pass into this 
space.
Triangular interval
This triangular interval is formed by:
■	 the lateral margin of the long head of the triceps brachii 
muscle,
■	 the shaft of the humerus, and
■	 the inferior margin of the teres major muscle 
(Fig. 7.45).
The radial nerve passes out of the axilla traveling 
through this interval to reach the posterior compartment 
of the arm.
Floor
The floor of the axilla is formed by fascia and a dome of 
skin that spans the distance between the inferior margins 
of the walls (Fig. 7.47 and see Fig. 7.40B). It is supported 
by the clavipectoral fascia. On a patient, the anterior axil­
lary fold is more superior in position than is the posterior 
axillary fold.
Inferiorly, structures pass into and out of the axilla 
immediately lateral to the floor where the anterior and 
posterior walls of the axilla converge and where the axilla 
is continuous with the anterior compartment of the arm.
Contents of the axilla
Passing through the axilla are the major vessels, nerves, 
and lymphatics of the upper limb. The space also contains 
the proximal parts of two muscles of the arm, the axillary 
Table 7.6  Muscles having parts that pass through the axilla (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Biceps brachii
Long head—supraglenoid 
tubercle of scapula; short 
head—apex of coracoid process
Tuberosity of radius
Musculocutaneous nerve 
(C5, C6)
Powerful flexor of the forearm at 
the elbow joint and supinator of 
the forearm; accessory flexor of 
the arm at the glenohumeral joint
Coracobrachialis
Apex of coracoid process
Linear roughening on 
midshaft of humerus 
on medial side
Musculocutaneous nerve 
(C5, C6, C7)
Flexor of the arm at the 
glenohumeral joint; adducts arm
process of the breast, and collections of lymph nodes, 
which drain the upper limb, chest wall, and breast.
The proximal parts of the biceps brachii and coracobra­
chialis muscles pass through the axilla (Table 7.6).

=== PAGE 745 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
721
The long and short heads of the muscle join in distal 
regions of the arm and primarily insert as a single tendon 
into the radial tuberosity in the forearm.
The biceps brachii muscle is primarily a powerful flexor 
of the forearm at the elbow joint and a powerful supinator 
in the forearm. Because both heads originate from the 
scapula, the muscle also acts as an accessory flexor of the 
arm at the glenohumeral joint. In addition, the long head 
prevents superior movement of the humerus on the glenoid 
cavity.
The biceps brachii muscle is innervated by the muscu­
locutaneous nerve.
Coracobrachialis
The coracobrachialis muscle, together with the short 
head of the biceps brachii muscle, originates from the apex 
of the coracoid process (Fig. 7.48). It passes vertically 
through the axilla to insert on a small linear roughening on 
the medial aspect of the humerus, approximately midshaft.
Biceps brachii
The biceps brachii muscle originates as two heads 
(Fig. 7.48):
■	 The short head originates from the apex of the coracoid 
process of the scapula and passes vertically through 
the axilla and into the arm where it joins the long 
head.
■	 The long head originates as a tendon from the supragle­
noid tubercle of the scapula, passes over the head of the 
humerus deep to the joint capsule of the glenohumeral 
joint, and enters the intertubercular sulcus where it is 
held in position by a ligament, the transverse humeral 
ligament, which spans the distance between the greater 
and lesser tubercles; the tendon passes through the 
axilla in the intertubercular sulcus and forms a muscle 
belly in the proximal part of the arm.
Fig. 7.48  Contents of the axilla: muscles. 
Long head of biceps brachii
Short head of biceps brachii
Tendon of biceps brachii
Coracobrachialis
Bicipital aponeurosis
Transverse humeral ligament

=== PAGE 746 ===
Upper Limb
722
Fig. 7.49  Contents of the axilla: the axillary artery. 
Lower border of teres major
Pectoralis minor
Lateral margin of rib I
Subclavius
Subclavian artery
1st part
2nd part
3rd part
Brachial artery
Axillary artery
The subclavian artery in the neck becomes the axillary 
artery at the lateral margin of rib I and passes through the 
axilla, becoming the brachial artery at the inferior margin 
of the teres major muscle.
The axillary artery is separated into three parts by the 
pectoralis minor muscle, which crosses anteriorly to the 
vessel (Fig. 7.49):
■	 The first part is proximal to the pectoralis minor.
■	 The second part is posterior to the pectoralis minor.
■	 The third part is distal to the pectoralis minor.
The coracobrachialis muscle flexes the arm at the gle­
nohumeral joint.
In the axilla, the medial surface of the coracobrachialis 
muscle is pierced by the musculocutaneous nerve, which 
innervates and then passes through the muscle to enter 
the arm.
Axillary artery
The axillary artery supplies the walls of the axilla and 
related regions, and continues as the major blood supply to 
the more distal parts of the upper limb (Fig. 7.49).

=== PAGE 747 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
723
Superior thoracic artery
The superior thoracic artery is small and originates from 
the anterior surface of the first part of the axillary artery 
(Fig. 7.50). It supplies upper regions of the medial and 
anterior axillary walls.
Thoraco-acromial artery
The thoraco-acromial artery is short and originates from 
the anterior surface of the second part of the axillary 
Generally, six branches arise from the axillary artery:
■	 One branch, the superior thoracic artery, originates 
from the first part.
■	 Two branches, the thoraco-acromial artery and the 
lateral thoracic artery, originate from the second 
part.
■	 Three branches, the subscapular artery, the anterior 
circumflex humeral artery, and the posterior cir­
cumflex humeral artery, originate from the third part 
(Fig. 7.50).
Fig. 7.50  Branches of the axillary artery. 
Posterior circumflex humeral artery
(quadrangular space)
Anterior circumflex humeral artery
Profunda brachii artery
(triangular interval)
Long head of triceps brachii
Thoraco-acromial artery
Subclavius
Pectoralis minor
Subscapular artery
Subscapularis
Superior thoracic artery
Lateral thoracic artery
Circumflex scapular branch
(triangular space)
Thoracodorsal artery
Latissimus dorsi
Teres major

=== PAGE 748 ===
Upper Limb
724
artery just posterior to the medial (superior) margin of 
the pectoralis minor muscle (Fig. 7.50). It curves around 
the superior margin of the muscle, penetrates the clavi­
pectoral fascia, and immediately divides into four 
branches—the pectoral, deltoid, clavicular, and acromial 
branches, which supply the anterior axillary wall and 
related regions.
Additionally, the pectoral branch contributes vascular 
supply to the breast, and the deltoid branch passes into the 
clavipectoral triangle where it accompanies the cephalic 
vein and supplies adjacent structures (see Fig. 7.41).
Lateral thoracic artery
The lateral thoracic artery arises from the anterior surface 
of the second part of the axillary artery posterior to the 
lateral (inferior) margin of the pectoralis minor (Fig. 7.50). 
It follows the margin of the muscle to the thoracic wall and 
supplies the medial and anterior walls of the axilla. In 
women, branches emerge from around the inferior margin 
of the pectoralis major muscle and contribute to the vas­
cular supply of the breast.
Subscapular artery
The subscapular artery is the largest branch of the axillary 
artery and is the major blood supply to the posterior wall 
of the axilla (Fig. 7.50). It also contributes to the blood 
supply of the posterior scapular region.
The subscapular artery originates from the posterior 
surface of the third part of the axillary artery, follows the 
inferior margin of the subscapularis muscle for a short 
distance, and then divides into its two terminal branches, 
the circumflex scapular artery and the thoracodorsal 
artery.
■	 The circumflex scapular artery passes through the tri­
angular space between the subscapularis, teres major, 
and long head of the triceps muscle. Posteriorly, it passes 
inferior to, or pierces, the origin of the teres minor 
muscle to enter the infraspinous fossa. It anastomoses 
with the suprascapular artery and the deep branch 
(dorsal scapular artery) of the transverse cervical 
artery, thereby contributing to an anastomotic network 
of vessels around the scapula.
■	 The thoracodorsal artery approximately follows the 
lateral border of the scapula to the inferior angle. It 
contributes to the vascular supply of the posterior and 
medial walls of the axilla.
Anterior circumflex humeral artery
The anterior circumflex humeral artery is small com­
pared to the posterior circumflex humeral artery, and 
originates from the lateral side of the third part of the 
axillary artery (Fig. 7.50). It passes anterior to the surgical 
neck of the humerus and anastomoses with the posterior 
circumflex humeral artery.
This anterior circumflex humeral artery supplies 
branches to surrounding tissues, which include the gleno­
humeral joint and the head of the humerus.
Posterior circumflex humeral artery
The posterior circumflex humeral artery originates 
from the lateral surface of the third part of the axillary 
artery immediately posterior to the origin of the anterior 
circumflex humeral artery (Fig. 7.50). With the axillary 
nerve, it leaves the axilla by passing through the quadran­
gular space between the teres major, teres minor, and long 
head of the triceps brachii muscle and the surgical neck of 
the humerus.
The posterior circumflex humeral artery curves around 
the surgical neck of the humerus and supplies the sur­
rounding muscles and the glenohumeral joint. It anasto­
moses with the anterior circumflex humeral artery and 
with branches from the profunda brachii, suprascapular, 
and thoraco-acromial arteries.

=== PAGE 749 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
725
Fig. 7.51  Axillary vein. 
Anterior scalene
Subclavian vein
Axillary vein
Paired brachial veins
Basilic vein
Cephalic vein
Pectoralis minor
Deltoid
Axillary vein
The axillary vein begins at the lower margin of the teres 
major muscle and is the continuation of the basilic vein 
(Fig. 7.51), which is a superficial vein that drains the pos­
teromedial surface of the hand and forearm and penetrates 
the deep fascia in the middle of the arm.
The axillary vein passes through the axilla medial and 
anterior to the axillary artery and becomes the subclavian 
vein as the vessel crosses the lateral border of rib I at the 
axillary inlet. Tributaries of the axillary vein generally 
follow the branches of the axillary artery. Other tributaries 
include brachial veins that follow the brachial artery and 
the cephalic vein.
The cephalic vein is a superficial vein that drains the 
lateral and posterior parts of the hand, the forearm, and 
the arm. In the area of the shoulder, it passes into an 
inverted triangular cleft (the clavipectoral triangle) between 
the deltoid muscle, pectoralis major muscle, and clavicle. 
In the superior part of the clavipectoral triangle, the 
cephalic vein passes deep to the clavicular head of the 
pectoralis major muscle and pierces the clavipectoral fascia 
to join the axillary vein. Many patients who are critically 
ill have lost blood or fluid, which requires replacement. 
Access to a peripheral vein is necessary to replace the fluid. 
The typical sites for venous access are the cephalic vein 
in the hand or veins that lie within the superficial tissues 
of the cubital fossa.

=== PAGE 750 ===
Upper Limb
726
In the clinic
Trauma to the arteries of the upper limb
The arterial supply to the upper limb is particularly 
susceptible to trauma in places where it is relatively fixed 
or in a subcutaneous position.
Fracture of rib I
As the subclavian artery passes out of the neck and into 
the axilla, it is fixed in position by the surrounding 
muscles to the superior surface of rib I. A rapid 
deceleration injury involving upper thoracic trauma may 
cause a first rib fracture, which may significantly 
compromise the distal part of the subclavian artery or the 
first part of the axillary artery. Fortunately, there are 
anastomotic connections between branches of the 
subclavian artery and the axillary artery, which form 
a network around the scapula and proximal end of the 
humerus; therefore, even with complete vessel 
transection, the arm is rarely rendered completely 
ischemic (ischemia is poor blood supply to an organ 
or a limb).
Anterior dislocation of the humeral head
Anterior dislocation of the humeral head may compress 
the axillary artery, resulting in vessel occlusion. This is 
unlikely to render the upper limb completely ischemic, but 
it may be necessary to surgically reconstruct the axillary 
artery to obtain pain-free function. Importantly, the axillary 
artery is intimately related to the brachial plexus, which 
may be damaged at the time of anterior dislocation.
In the clinic
Subclavian/axillary venous access
There are a number of routes through which central 
venous access may be obtained. The “subclavian route” 
and the jugular routes are commonly used by clinicians. 
The subclavian route is a misnomer that remains the 
preferred term in clinical practice. In fact, most clinicians 
enter the first part of the axillary vein.
There are a number of patients that undergo 
catheterization of the subclavian vein/axillary vein. 
Entering the subclavian vein/axillary vein is a relatively 
straightforward technique. The clavicle is identified and a 
sharp needle is placed in the infraclavicular region, aiming 
superomedially. When venous blood is aspirated, access 
has been obtained. This route is popular for long-term 
venous access, such as Hickman lines, and for 
shorter-term access where multiple-lumen catheters are 
inserted (e.g., intensive care unit). 
The subclavian vein/axillary vein is also the preferred 
site for insertion of pacemaker wires. There is, however, a 
preferred point of entry into the vein to prevent 
complications. The vein should be punctured in the 
midclavicular line or lateral to this line. The reason for this 
puncture site is the course of the vein and its relationship 
to other structures. The vein passes anterior to the artery, 
superior to the first rib, and inferior to the clavicle as it 
courses toward the thoracic inlet. Beneath the clavicle is 
situated the subclavius muscle. Should the puncture of the 
vein enter where the subclavius muscle is related to the 
axillary vein, the catheter or wire may become kinked at 
this point. Moreover, the constant contraction and 
relaxation of this muscle will induce fatigue in the line and 
wire, which may ultimately lead to fracture. A fractured 
pacemaker wire or a rupture in a chemotherapy catheter 
can have severe consequences for the patient.
In the clinic
Imaging the blood supply to the upper limb
When there is clinical evidence of vascular compromise to 
the upper limb, or vessels are needed to form an 
arteriovenous fistula (which is necessary for renal dialysis), 
imaging is required to assess the vessels.
Ultrasound is a useful tool for carrying out a noninvasive 
assessment of the vessels of the upper limb from the third 
part of the subclavian artery to the deep and superficial 
palmar arteries. Blood flow can be quantified and anatomical 
variants can be noted.
Angiography is carried out in certain cases. The femoral 
artery is punctured below the inguinal ligament and a long 
catheter is placed through the iliac arteries and around the 
arch of the aorta to enter either the left subclavian artery or 
the brachiocephalic trunk and then the right subclavian 
artery. Radiopaque contrast agents are injected into the 
vessel and radiographs are obtained as the contrast agents 
pass first through the arteries, then the capillaries, and 
finally the veins.

=== PAGE 751 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
727
that innervate the upper limb originate from the brachial 
plexus, mostly from the cords. Proximal parts of the bra­
chial plexus are posterior to the subclavian artery in the 
neck, while more distal regions of the plexus surround the 
axillary artery.
Brachial plexus
The brachial plexus is a somatic nerve plexus formed by the 
anterior rami of C5 to C8, and most of the anterior ramus 
of T1 (Fig. 7.52). The plexus originates in the neck, passes 
laterally and inferiorly over rib I, and enters the axilla.
The parts of the brachial plexus, from medial to lateral, 
are roots, trunks, divisions, and cords. All major nerves 
Fig. 7.52  Brachial plexus. A. Major components in the neck and axilla. B. Schematic showing parts of the brachial plexus. 
Terminal
nerves
Cords
Divisions
Trunks
Roots
(anterior rami)
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Lateral
Posterior
Posterior
Posterior
Posterior
Medial
Anterior
Anterior
Ante
rior 
Arranged
around 
2nd part of 
axillary 
artery
B
Superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion
Inferior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion
Middle cervical 
sympathetic ganglion
Gray ramus
communicans
Roots 
(anterior rami of C5 to T1)
Trunks 
(superior, middle, inferior)
Divisions 
(anterior, posterior)
Cords 
(medial, lateral, posterior)
C8
C7
C6
C5
T1
Middle scalene muscle
Anterior scalene tendon
A

=== PAGE 752 ===
Upper Limb
728
Roots
The roots of the brachial plexus are the anterior rami of 
C5 to C8, and most of T1. Close to their origin, the roots 
receive gray rami communicantes from the sympathetic 
trunk (Fig. 7.52). These carry postganglionic sympathetic 
fibers onto the roots for distribution to the periphery. The 
roots and trunks enter the posterior triangle of the neck 
by passing between the anterior scalene and middle scalene 
muscles and lie superior and posterior to the subclavian 
artery.
Trunks
The three trunks of the brachial plexus originate from the 
roots, pass laterally over rib I, and enter the axilla (Fig. 
7.52):
■	 The superior trunk is formed by the union of C5 and C6 
roots.
■	 The middle trunk is a continuation of the C7 root.
■	 The inferior trunk is formed by the union of the C8 and 
T1 roots.
The inferior trunk lies on rib I posterior to the subclavian 
artery; the middle and superior trunks are more superior 
in position.
Divisions
Each of the three trunks of the brachial plexus divides into 
an anterior and a posterior division (Fig. 7.52):
■	 The three anterior divisions form parts of the brachial 
plexus that ultimately give rise to peripheral nerves 
associated with the anterior compartments of the arm 
and forearm.
■	 The three posterior divisions combine to form parts of 
the brachial plexus that give rise to nerves associated 
with the posterior compartments.
No peripheral nerves originate directly from the divi­
sions of the brachial plexus.
Cords
The three cords of the brachial plexus originate from the 
divisions and are related to the second part of the axillary 
artery (Fig. 7.52):
■	 The lateral cord results from the union of the anterior 
divisions of the upper and middle trunks and therefore 
has contributions from C5 to C7—it is positioned lateral 
to the second part of the axillary artery.
■	 The medial cord is medial to the second part of the 
axillary artery and is the continuation of the anterior 
division of the inferior trunk—it contains contributions 
from C8 and T1.
■	 The posterior cord occurs posterior to the second part 
of the axillary artery and originates as the union of all 
three posterior divisions—it contains contributions 
from all roots of the brachial plexus (C5 to T1).
Most of the major peripheral nerves of the upper limb 
originate from the cords of the brachial plexus. Generally, 
nerves associated with the anterior compartments of the 
upper limb arise from the medial and lateral cords and 
nerves associated with the posterior compartments origi­
nate from the posterior cord.

=== PAGE 753 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
729
The dorsal scapular nerve:
■	 originates from the C5 root of the brachial plexus,
■	 passes posteriorly, often piercing the middle scalene 
muscle in the neck, to reach and travel along the medial 
border of the scapula (Fig. 7.54), and
■	 innervates the rhomboid major and minor muscles from 
their deep surfaces.
Branches (Table 7.7)
Branches of the roots
In addition to small segmental branches from C5 to C8 to 
muscles of the neck and a contribution of C5 to the phrenic 
nerve, the roots of the brachial plexus give rise to the dorsal 
scapular and long thoracic nerves (Fig. 7.53).
Fig. 7.53  Brachial plexus. A. Schematic showing branches of the brachial plexus. B. Relationships to the axillary artery. 
Terminal 
nerves
Cords
Divisions
Trunks
Roots 
(anterior rami)
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
Superior
Middle
Inferior
Lateral
Posterior
Posterior
Posterior
Posterior
Medial
Anterior
Anterior
Ante
rior 
A
Lateral pectoral nerve
Medial pectoral nerve
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
Musculocutaneous
Median
Radial
Ulnar
Axillary
Long thoracic
nerve
Suprascapular nerve Dorsal scapular nerve
Contribution 
to phrenic 
nerve
Nerve to subclavius
Superior
subscapular nerve
Thoracodorsal nerve
Inferior subscapular nerve
Dorsal scapular nerve
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
Suprascapular nerve
Lateral pectoral nerve
Medial cord
Posterior cord
Lateral cord
Medial pectoral nerve
Second part of axillary artery
Musculocutaneous nerve
Axillary nerve
Median nerve
C7 fibers
Radial nerve
Ulnar nerve
Superior subscapular nerve
Thoracodorsal nerve
Inferior subscapular nerve
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
Long thoracic nerve
Intercostobrachial nerve 
(lateral cutaneous branch of T2)
Nerve to subclavius
B

=== PAGE 754 ===
Upper Limb
730
Fig. 7.54  Branches of the roots and trunks of the brachial plexus. 
Dorsal scapular nerve
Middle scalene muscle
Anterior scalene tendon
T1 intercostal nerve
C5 branch to phrenic nerve
Phrenic nerve
Subclavian vein
Nerve to subclavius
Axillary artery
Long thoracic nerve
Serratus anterior
Suprascapular foramen
Suprascapular nerve
The long thoracic nerve:
■	 originates from the anterior rami of C5 to C7,
■	 passes vertically down the neck, through the axillary 
inlet, and down the medial wall of the axilla to supply 
the serratus anterior muscle (Fig. 7.54), and
■	 lies on the superficial aspect of the serratus anterior 
muscle.
Branches of the trunks
The only branches from the trunks of the brachial plexus 
are two nerves that originate from the superior trunk 
(upper trunk): the suprascapular nerve and the nerve to 
the subclavius muscle (Fig. 7.53).

=== PAGE 755 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
731
The suprascapular nerve (C5 and C6):
■	 originates from the superior trunk of the brachial 
plexus,
■	 passes laterally through the posterior triangle of the 
neck (Fig. 7.54) and through the suprascapular foramen 
to enter the posterior scapular region,
■	 innervates the supraspinatus and infraspinatus muscles, 
and
■	 is accompanied in the lateral parts of the neck and in the 
posterior scapular region by the suprascapular artery.
The nerve to the subclavius muscle (C5 and C6) is a 
small nerve that:
■	 originates from the superior trunk of the brachial 
plexus,
■	 passes anteroinferiorly over the subclavian artery and 
vein, and
■	 innervates the subclavius muscle.
Branches of the lateral cord
Three nerves originate entirely or partly from the lateral 
cord (Fig. 7.53).
■	 The lateral pectoral nerve is the most proximal of the 
branches from the lateral cord. It passes anteriorly, 
together with the thoraco-acromial artery, to penetrate 
the clavipectoral fascia that spans the gap between the 
subclavius and pectoralis minor muscles (Fig. 7.55), 
and innervates the pectoralis major muscle.
■	 The musculocutaneous nerve is a large terminal 
branch of the lateral cord. It passes laterally to penetrate 
the coracobrachialis muscle and pass between the biceps 
brachii and brachialis muscles in the arm, and inner­
vates all three flexor muscles in the anterior compart­
ment of the arm, terminating as the lateral cutaneous 
nerve of  the forearm.
■	 The lateral root of  the median nerve is the largest 
terminal branch of the lateral cord and passes medially 
to join a similar branch from the medial cord to form the 
median nerve (Fig. 7.55).
Branches of the medial cord
The medial cord has five branches (Fig. 7.55).
■	 The medial pectoral nerve is the most proximal 
branch. It receives a communicating branch from the 
lateral pectoral nerve and then passes anteriorly 
between the axillary artery and axillary vein. Branches 
of the nerve penetrate and supply the pectoralis minor 
muscle. Some of these branches pass through the 
muscle to reach and supply the pectoralis major muscle. 
Other branches occasionally pass around the inferior or 
lateral margin of the pectoralis minor muscle to reach 
the pectoralis major muscle.
■	 The medial cutaneous nerve of  the arm (medial 
brachial cutaneous nerve) passes through the axilla 
and into the arm where it penetrates deep fascia and 
supplies skin over the medial side of the distal third of 
the arm. In the axilla, the nerve communicates with the 
intercostobrachial nerve of T2. Fibers of the medial 
cutaneous nerve of the arm innervate the upper part of 
the medial surface of the arm and floor of the axilla.
■	 The medial cutaneous nerve of  the forearm 
(medial antebrachial cutaneous nerve) originates 
just distal to the origin of the medial cutaneous nerve 
of the arm. It passes out of the axilla and into the arm 
where it gives off a branch to the skin over the biceps 
brachii muscle, and then continues down the arm to 
penetrate the deep fascia with the basilic vein, continu­
ing inferiorly to supply the skin over the anterior surface 
of the forearm. It innervates skin over the medial surface 
of the forearm down to the wrist.
■	 The medial root of  the median nerve passes laterally 
to join with a similar root from the lateral cord to form 
the median nerve anterior to the third part of the axil­
lary artery.
■	 The ulnar nerve is a large terminal branch of the 
medial cord (Fig. 7.55). However, near its origin, it often 
receives a communicating branch from the lateral root 
of the median nerve originating from the lateral cord 
and carrying fibers from C7 (see Fig. 5.73B). The ulnar 
nerve passes through the arm and forearm into the hand 
where it innervates all intrinsic muscles of the hand 
(except for the three thenar muscles and the two lateral 
lumbrical muscles). On passing through the forearm, 
branches of the ulnar nerve innervate the flexor carpi 
ulnaris muscle and the medial half of the flexor digi­
torum profundus muscle. The ulnar nerve innervates 
skin over the palmar surface of the little finger, medial 
half of the ring finger, and associated palm and wrist, 
and the skin over the dorsal surface of the medial part 
of the hand.
Median nerve.  The median nerve is formed anterior to 
the third part of the axillary artery by the union of lateral 
and medial roots originating from the lateral and medial 
cords of the brachial plexus (Fig. 7.55). It passes into the 
arm anterior to the brachial artery and through the arm 
into the forearm, where branches innervate most of the 
muscles in the anterior compartment of the forearm 
(except for the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle and the medial 
half of the flexor digitorum profundus muscle, which are 
innervated by the ulnar nerve).

=== PAGE 756 ===
Upper Limb
732
Fig. 7.55  Branches of the lateral and medial cords of the brachial plexus. 
Lateral pectoral nerve
Medial pectoral nerve
Axillary artery
Musculocutaneous nerve
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of arm
Medial cutaneous nerve of forearm
Medial cutaneous nerve of arm
Lateral cord
Medial cord
Pectoralis minor
T1 intercostal nerve

=== PAGE 757 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
733
Table 7.7  Branches of brachial plexus (parentheses indicate that a spinal segment is a minor component of the nerve or is inconsistently 
present in the nerve)
Branch
Dorsal scapular
Origin: C5 root
Spinal segment: C5
Function: motor
Rhomboid major, rhomboid minor
Long thoracic
Origin: C5 to C7 roots
Spinal segments: C5 to C7
Function: motor
Serratus anterior
Suprascapular
Origin: Superior trunk
Spinal segments: C5, C6
Function: motor
Supraspinatus, infraspinatus
Nerve to subclavius
Origin: Superior trunk
Spinal segments: C5, C6
Function: motor
Subclavius
Lateral pectoral
Origin: Lateral cord
Spinal segments: C5 to C7
Function: motor
Pectoralis major
Musculocutaneous
Origin: Lateral cord
Spinal segments: C5 to C7
Function: motor
All muscles in the anterior compartment of the arm
Function: sensory
Skin on lateral side of forearm
Medial pectoral
Origin: Medial cord
Spinal segments: C8, T1
(also receives contributions from spinal 
segments C5 to C7 through a communication 
with the lateral pectoral nerve)
Function: motor
Pectoralis major, pectoralis minor
Medial cutaneous of arm
Origin: Medial cord
Spinal segments: C8, T1
T1
T2
Function: sensory
Skin on medial side of distal one-third of arm
Continued

=== PAGE 758 ===
Upper Limb
734
Branch
Medial cutaneous of forearm
Origin: Medial cord
Spinal segments: C8, T1
Function: sensory
Skin on medial side of forearm
Median
Origin: Medial and lateral cords
Spinal segments: (C5), C6 to T1
Function: motor
All muscles in the anterior compartment of the forearm (except flexor 
carpi ulnaris and medial half of flexor digitorum profundus), three 
thenar muscles of the thumb and two lateral lumbrical muscles
Function: sensory
Skin over the palmar surface of the lateral three and one-half digits and 
over the lateral side of the palm and middle of the wrist
Ulnar
Origin: Medial cord
Spinal segments: (C7), C8, T1
Function: motor
All intrinsic muscles of the hand (except three thenar muscles 
and two lateral lumbricals); also flexor carpi ulnaris and the medial half 
of flexor digitorum profundus in the forearm
Function: sensory
Skin over the palmar surface of the medial one and one-half digits and 
associated palm and wrist, and skin over the dorsal surface 
of the medial one and one-half digits
Superior subscapular
Origin: Posterior cord
Spinal segments: C5, C6
Function: motor
Subscapularis
Thoracodorsal
Origin: Posterior cord
Spinal segments: C6 to C8
Function: motor
Latissimus dorsi
Inferior subscapular
Origin: Posterior cord
Spinal segments: C5, C6
Function: motor
Subscapularis, teres major
Axillary
Origin: Posterior cord
Spinal segments: C5, C6
Function: motor
Deltoid, teres minor
Function: sensory
Skin over upper lateral part of arm
Radial
Origin: Posterior cord
Spinal segments: C5 to C8, (T1)
Function: motor
All muscles in the posterior compartments of arm and forearm
Function: sensory
Skin on the posterior aspects of the arm and forearm, the lower lateral 
surface of the arm, and the dorsal lateral surface of the hand
Table 7.7  Branches of brachial plexus (parentheses indicate that a spinal segment is a minor component of the nerve or is inconsistently 
present in the nerve)—cont’d

=== PAGE 759 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
735
of these three nerves and passes vertically along the poste­
rior axillary wall. It penetrates and innervates the latissimus 
dorsi muscle. The inferior subscapular nerve also passes 
inferiorly along the posterior axillary wall and innervates 
the subscapularis and teres major muscles.
The axillary nerve originates from the posterior cord 
and passes inferiorly and laterally along the posterior 
wall to exit the axilla through the quadrangular space 
(Fig. 7.56). It passes posteriorly around the surgical neck 
of the humerus and innervates both the deltoid and teres 
minor muscles. A superior lateral cutaneous nerve of  
the arm originates from the axillary nerve after passing 
through the quadrangular space and loops around the 
posterior margin of the deltoid muscle to innervate skin in 
that region. The axillary nerve is accompanied by the 
posterior circumflex humeral artery.
The radial nerve is the largest terminal branch of the 
posterior cord (Fig. 7.56). It passes out of the axilla and 
into the posterior compartment of the arm by passing 
through the triangular interval between the inferior border 
of the teres major muscle, the long head of the triceps 
brachii muscle, and the shaft of the humerus. It is accom­
panied through the triangular interval by the profunda 
brachii artery, which originates from the brachial artery in 
the anterior compartment of the arm. The radial nerve and 
its branches innervate:
■	 all muscles in the posterior compartments of the arm 
and forearm, and
■	 the skin on the posterior aspect of the arm and forearm, 
the lower lateral surface of the arm, and the dorsal 
lateral surface of the hand.
The posterior cutaneous nerve of  the arm (poste­
rior brachial cutaneous nerve) originates from the 
radial nerve in the axilla and innervates skin on the poste­
rior surface of the arm.
The median nerve continues into the hand to 
innervate:
■	 the three thenar muscles associated with the thumb,
■	 the two lateral lumbrical muscles associated with move­
ment of the index and middle fingers, and
■	 the skin over the palmar surface of the lateral three and 
one-half digits and over the lateral side of the palm and 
middle of the wrist.
The musculocutaneous nerve, the lateral root of the 
median nerve, the median nerve, the medial root of the 
median nerve, and the ulnar nerve form an M over 
the third part of the axillary artery (Fig. 7.55). This feature, 
together with penetration of the coracobrachialis muscle 
by the musculocutaneous nerve, can be used to identify 
components of the brachial plexus in the axilla.
Branches of the posterior cord
Five nerves originate from the posterior cord of the brachial 
plexus:
■	 the superior subscapular nerve,
■	 the thoracodorsal nerve,
■	 the inferior subscapular nerve,
■	 the axillary nerve, and
■	 the radial nerve (Fig. 7.53).
All these nerves except the radial nerve innervate muscles 
associated with the shoulder region or the posterior wall of 
the axilla; the radial nerve passes into the arm and forearm.
The superior subscapular, thoracodorsal, and inferior 
subscapular nerves originate sequentially from the poste­
rior cord and pass directly into muscles associated with the 
posterior axillary wall (Fig. 7.56). The superior subscapu­
lar nerve is short and passes into and supplies the sub­
scapularis muscle. The thoracodorsal nerve is the longest 

=== PAGE 760 ===
Upper Limb
736
Fig. 7.56  Branches of the posterior cord of the brachial plexus. 
Axillary nerve
Superior subscapular nerve
Thoracodorsal nerve
Inferior subscapular nerve
Radial nerve
Posterior cutaneous
nerve of arm
In the clinic
Injuries to the brachial plexus
The brachial plexus is an extremely complex structure. When 
damaged, it requires meticulous clinical history taking and 
examination. Assessment of the individual nerve functions 
can be obtained by nerve conduction studies and 
electromyography, which assess the latency of muscle 
contraction when the nerve is artificially stimulated.
Brachial plexus injuries are usually the result of blunt 
trauma producing nerve avulsions and disruption. These 
injuries are usually devastating for the function of the upper 
limb and require many months of dedicated rehabilitation for 
even a small amount of function to return.
Spinal cord injuries in the cervical region and direct 
pulling injuries tend to affect the roots of the brachial plexus. 
Severe trauma to the first rib usually affects the trunks. The 
divisions and cords of the brachial plexus can be injured by 
dislocation of the glenohumeral joint.

=== PAGE 761 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Axilla
7
737
The 20–30 axillary nodes are generally divided into five 
groups on the basis of location.
■	 Humeral (lateral) nodes posteromedial to the axillary 
vein receive most of the lymphatic drainage from the 
upper limb.
■	 Pectoral (anterior) nodes occur along the inferior 
margin of the pectoralis minor muscle along the course 
of the lateral thoracic vessels and receive drainage from 
the abdominal wall, the chest, and the mammary gland.
Lymphatics
All lymphatics from the upper limb drain into lymph nodes 
in the axilla (Fig. 7.57).
In addition, axillary nodes receive drainage from an 
extensive area on the adjacent trunk, which includes 
regions of the upper back and shoulder, the lower neck, the 
chest, and the upper anterolateral abdominal wall. Axil­
lary nodes also receive drainage from approximately 75% 
of the mammary gland.
Fig. 7.57  Lymph nodes and vessels in the axilla. 
Humeral nodes
Central nodes
Pectoral nodes
Apical nodes
Infraclavicular nodes
Subscapular nodes
Anterior scalene
Most of upper limb
Some of upper limb
Anterolateral body wall 
and centrolateral part 
of mammary gland
Right subclavian trunk
Superior part of 
mammary gland

=== PAGE 762 ===
Upper Limb
738
■	 Subscapular (posterior) nodes on the posterior axil­
lary wall in association with the subscapular vessels 
drain the posterior axillary wall and receive lymphatics 
from the back, the shoulder, and the neck.
■	 Central nodes are embedded in axillary fat and receive 
tributaries from humeral, subscapular, and pectoral 
groups of nodes.
■	 Apical nodes are the most superior group of nodes in 
the axilla and drain all other groups of nodes in the 
region. In addition, they receive lymphatic vessels that 
accompany the cephalic vein as well as vessels that 
drain the superior region of the mammary gland.
Efferent vessels from the apical group converge to form 
the subclavian trunk, which usually joins the venous 
system at the junction between the right subclavian vein 
and the right internal jugular vein in the neck. On the left, 
the subclavian trunk usually joins the thoracic duct in the 
base of the neck.
In the clinic
Breast cancer
Lymphatic drainage from the lateral part of the breast 
passes through nodes in the axilla. Significant disruption 
to the normal lymphatic drainage of the upper limb may 
occur if a mastectomy or a surgical axillary nodal 
clearance has been carried out for breast cancer. 
Furthermore, some patients have radiotherapy to the 
axilla to prevent the spread of metastatic disease, but a 
side effect of this is the destruction of the tiny lymphatics 
as well as the cancer cells.
If the lymphatic drainage of the upper limb is 
damaged, the arm may swell and pitting edema 
(lymphedema) may develop.
Fig. 7.58  Axillary process of the breast. 
Breast
Axillary process
Axillary process of the mammary gland
Although the mammary gland is in superficial fascia 
overlying the thoracic wall, its superolateral region extends 
along the inferior margin of the pectoralis major muscle 
toward the axilla. In some cases, this may pass around the 
margin of the muscle to penetrate deep fascia and enter the 
axilla (Fig. 7.58). This axillary process rarely reaches as 
high as the apex of the axilla.

=== PAGE 763 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Arm
7
739
ARM
The arm is the region of the upper limb between the shoul­
der and the elbow (Fig. 7.59). The superior aspect of the 
arm communicates medially with the axilla. Inferiorly, a 
number of important structures pass between the arm and 
the forearm through the cubital fossa, which is positioned 
anterior to the elbow joint.
The arm is divided into two compartments by medial 
and lateral intermuscular septa, which pass from each side 
Fig. 7.59  Arm. A. Proximal and distal relationships. B. Transverse section through the middle of the arm. 
Axilla
Cubital
fossa
Lateral intermuscular septum
Medial intermuscular septum
Humerus
Anterior (flexor) compartment
Posterior (extensor) compartment
Deep fascia
Forearm
A
B
Arm
Line of section
of the humerus to the outer sleeve of deep fascia that sur­
rounds the limb (Fig. 7.59).
The anterior compartment of the arm contains muscles 
that predominantly flex the elbow joint; the posterior 
compartment contains muscles that extend the joint. 
Major nerves and vessels supply and pass through each 
compartment.

=== PAGE 767 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Arm
7
743
The tendon of the long head passes through the gleno­
humeral joint superior to the head of the humerus and 
then passes through the intertubercular sulcus and enters 
the arm. In the arm, the tendon joins with its muscle belly 
and, together with the muscle belly of the short head, 
overlies the brachialis muscle.
The long and short heads converge to form a single 
tendon, which inserts onto the radial tuberosity.
As the tendon enters the forearm, a flat sheet of connec­
tive tissue (the bicipital aponeurosis) fans out from the 
medial side of the tendon to blend with deep fascia covering 
the anterior compartment of the forearm.
The biceps brachii muscle is a powerful flexor of the 
forearm at the elbow joint; it is also the most powerful 
supinator of the forearm when the elbow joint is flexed. 
Because the two heads of the biceps brachii muscle cross 
the glenohumeral joint, the muscle can also flex the gleno­
humeral joint.
Muscles
The anterior compartment of the arm contains three 
muscles—the coracobrachialis, brachialis, and biceps 
brachii muscles—which are innervated predominantly by 
the musculocutaneous nerve.
The posterior compartment contains one muscle—the 
triceps brachii muscle—which is innervated by the radial 
nerve.
Coracobrachialis
The coracobrachialis muscle extends from the tip of the 
coracoid process of the scapula to the medial side of the 
midshaft of the humerus (Fig. 7.64 and Table 7.8). It 
passes through the axilla and is penetrated and innervated 
by the musculocutaneous nerve.
The coracobrachialis muscle flexes the arm.
Biceps brachii
The biceps brachii muscle has two heads:
■	 The short head of the muscle originates from the cora­
coid process in conjunction with the coracobrachialis.
■	 The long head originates as a tendon from the supragle­
noid tubercle of the scapula (Fig. 7.64 and Table 7.8).
Fig. 7.64  Coracobrachialis, biceps brachii, and brachialis muscles. 
Long head of biceps
brachii muscle
Short head of biceps
brachii muscle
Coracobrachialis muscle
Transverse humeral ligament
Brachialis muscle
Tuberosity of ulna
Bicipital aponeurosis (cut )
Radial tuberosity
Capitulum
Trochlear notch
Olecranon
Coronoid process
Radial tuberosity
Humerus
B
B. Radiograph of the elbow joint (lateral view). 
Fig. 7.63, cont’d

=== PAGE 768 ===
Upper Limb
744
Table 7.8  Muscles of the anterior compartment of the arm (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Coracobrachialis
Apex of coracoid process
Linear roughening on 
midshaft of humerus 
on medial side
Musculocutaneous nerve 
(C5, C6, C7)
Flexor of the arm at the 
glenohumeral joint
Biceps brachii
Long head—supraglenoid 
tubercle of scapula; short 
head—apex of coracoid 
process
Radial tuberosity
Musculocutaneous nerve 
(C5, C6)
Powerful flexor of the forearm at 
the elbow joint and supinator of 
the forearm; accessory flexor of 
the arm at the glenohumeral joint
Brachialis
Anterior aspect of humerus 
(medial and lateral surfaces) 
and adjacent intermuscular 
septae
Tuberosity of the ulna
Musculocutaneous nerve 
(C5, C6); small contribution 
by the radial nerve (C7) to 
lateral part of muscle
Powerful flexor of the forearm at 
the elbow joint
The biceps brachii muscle is innervated by the muscu­
locutaneous nerve. A tap on the tendon of the biceps 
brachii at the elbow is used to test predominantly spinal 
cord segment C6.
In the clinic
Rupture of biceps tendon
It is relatively unusual for muscles and their tendons to 
rupture in the upper limb; however, the tendon that most 
commonly ruptures is the tendon of the long head of the 
biceps brachii muscle. In isolation, this has relatively little 
effect on the upper limb, but it does produce a 
characteristic deformity—on flexing the elbow, there is an 
extremely prominent bulge of the muscle belly as its 
unrestrained fibers contract—the “Popeye” sign.
Distal biceps tendon rupture also occurs. It is important 
to determine the site of the rupture, whether it’s at the 
musculotendinous junction, midtendon, or at the insertion 
because this will determine the surgical approach for 
repair.
Fig. 7.65  Triceps muscle. 
Olecranon
Long head of triceps brachii
Lateral head of triceps brachii
Medial head of triceps brachii
Lateral head of triceps brachii
Radial groove of humerus
Brachialis
The brachialis muscle originates from the distal half of 
the anterior aspect of the humerus and from adjacent parts 
of the intermuscular septa, particularly on the medial side 
(Fig. 7.64 and Table 7.8). It lies beneath the biceps brachii 
muscle, is flattened dorsoventrally, and converges to form a 
tendon, which attaches to the tuberosity of the ulna.
The brachialis muscle flexes the forearm at the elbow 
joint.
Innervation of the brachialis muscle is predominantly 
by the musculocutaneous nerve. A small component of the 
lateral part is innervated by the radial nerve.
Posterior compartment
The only muscle of the posterior compartment of the arm 
is the triceps brachii muscle (Fig. 7.65 and Table 7.9). 
The triceps brachii muscle has three heads:

=== PAGE 769 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Arm
7
745
compartment of the arm (Fig. 7.66A,B). It enters the 
posterior compartment with the radial nerve and together 
they pass through the triangular interval, which is formed 
by the shaft of the humerus, the inferior margin of the 
teres major muscle, and the lateral margin of the long head 
of the triceps muscle. They then pass along the radial 
groove on the posterior surface of the humerus deep to the 
lateral head of the triceps brachii muscle.
Branches of the profunda brachii artery supply adjacent 
muscles and anastomose with the posterior circumflex 
humeral artery. The artery terminates as two collateral 
vessels, which contribute to an anastomotic network of 
arteries around the elbow joint (Fig. 7.66B).
■	 The long head originates from the infraglenoid tubercle 
of the scapula.
■	 The medial head originates from the extensive area on 
the posterior surface of the shaft of the humerus inferior 
to the radial groove.
■	 The lateral head originates from a linear roughening 
superior to the radial groove of the humerus.
The three heads converge to form a large tendon, which 
inserts on the superior surface of the olecranon of the 
ulna.
The triceps brachii muscle extends the forearm at the 
elbow joint.
Innervation of the triceps brachii is by branches of the 
radial nerve. A tap on the tendon of the triceps brachii tests 
predominantly spinal cord segment C7.
Arteries and veins
Brachial artery
The major artery of the arm, the brachial artery, is found 
in the anterior compartment (Fig. 7.66A). Beginning as a 
continuation of the axillary artery at the lower border of 
the teres major muscle, it terminates just distal to the elbow 
joint where it divides into the radial and ulnar arteries.
In the proximal arm, the brachial artery lies on the 
medial side. In the distal arm, it moves laterally to assume 
a position midway between the lateral epicondyle and the 
medial epicondyle of the humerus. It crosses anteriorly to 
the elbow joint where it lies immediately medial to the 
tendon of the biceps brachii muscle. The brachial artery is 
palpable along its length. In proximal regions, the brachial 
artery can be compressed against the medial side of the 
humerus.
Branches of the brachial artery in the arm include those 
to adjacent muscles and two ulnar collateral vessels, which 
contribute to a network of arteries around the elbow joint 
(Fig. 7.66B). Additional branches are the profunda brachii 
artery and nutrient arteries to the humerus, which pass 
through a foramen in the anteromedial surface of the 
humeral shaft.
Profunda brachii artery
The profunda brachii artery, the largest branch of 
the brachial artery, passes into and supplies the posterior 
Table 7.9  Muscle of the posterior compartment of the arm (spinal segment indicated in bold is the major segment innervating 
the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Triceps brachii
Long head—infraglenoid tubercle of scapula; 
medial head—posterior surface of humerus; 
lateral head—posterior surface of humerus
Olecranon
Radial nerve 
(C6, C7, C8)
Extension of the forearm at the elbow joint; 
long head can also extend and adduct the 
arm at the shoulder joint
In the clinic
Blood pressure measurement
Blood pressure measurement is an extremely important 
physiological parameter. High blood pressure 
(hypertension) requires treatment to prevent long-term 
complications such as stroke. Low blood pressure may be 
caused by extreme blood loss, widespread infection, or 
poor cardiac output (e.g., after myocardial infarction). 
Accurate measurement of blood pressure is essential.
Most clinicians use a sphygmomanometer and a 
stethoscope. The sphygmomanometer is a device that 
inflates a cuff around the midportion of the arm to 
compress the brachial artery against the humerus. The 
cuff is inflated so it exceeds the systolic blood pressure 
(greater than 120 mm Hg). The clinician places a 
stethoscope over the brachial artery in the cubital fossa 
and listens (auscultates) for the pulse. As the pressure in 
the arm cuff of the sphygmomanometer is reduced just 
below the level of the systolic blood pressure, the pulse 
becomes audible as a regular thumping sound. As the 
pressure in the sphygmomanometer continues to drop, 
the regular thumping sound becomes clearer. When the 
pressure in the sphygmomanometer is less than that of 
the diastolic blood pressure, the audible thumping sound 
becomes inaudible. Using the simple scale on the 
sphygmomanometer, the patient’s blood pressure can be 
determined. The normal range is 90–120/60–80 mm Hg 
(systolic blood pressure/diastolic blood pressure).

=== PAGE 770 ===
Upper Limb
746
Subclavian artery
Axillary artery
Brachial artery
Profunda brachii artery
Coracobrachialis
Teres major
Radial artery
Ulnar artery
Bicipital aponeurosis
A
Fig. 7.66  Brachial artery. A. In context.

=== PAGE 771 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Arm
7
747
Axillary artery
Brachial artery
Profunda brachii artery
(in radial groove)
Radial artery
Ulnar artery
Humeral nutrient artery
Superior ulnar collateral artery
Anterior ulnar recurrent artery
Anterior interosseous artery
Common interosseous artery
Posterior interosseous
 artery
Posterior ulnar recurrent artery
Inferior ulnar collateral artery
Middle collateral artery
Radial collateral artery
Radial recurrent artery
Posterior circumflex humeral artery
Anterior circumflex humeral artery
Recurrent interosseous artery
B
Brachial artery. B. Branches. 
Fig. 7.66, cont’d

=== PAGE 772 ===
Upper Limb
748
The basilic vein passes vertically in the distal half of the 
arm, penetrates deep fascia to assume a position medial to 
the brachial artery, and then becomes the axillary vein at 
the lower border of the teres major muscle. The brachial 
veins join the basilic, or axillary, vein.
The cephalic vein passes superiorly on the anterolateral 
aspect of the arm and through the anterior wall of the 
axilla to reach the axillary vein.
Veins
Paired brachial veins pass along the medial and lateral 
sides of the brachial artery, receiving tributaries that 
accompany branches of the artery (Fig. 7.67).
In addition to these deep veins, two large subcutaneous 
veins, the basilic vein and the cephalic vein, are located in 
the arm.
Fig. 7.67  Veins of the arm. 
Axillary vein
Coracobrachialis
Inferior margin of teres major
Paired brachial veins
Basilic vein
Brachialis
Basilic vein (subcutaneous superficial vein)
Basilic vein penetrates
deep fascia
Deep veins accompanying arteries
Cephalic vein
Biceps brachii

=== PAGE 773 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Arm
7
749
penetrates deep fascia, and continues as the lateral cuta­
neous nerve of  the forearm.
The musculocutaneous nerve provides:
■	 motor innervation to all muscles in the anterior com­
partment of the arm, and
■	 sensory innervation to skin on the lateral surface of the 
forearm.
Nerves
Musculocutaneous nerve
The musculocutaneous nerve leaves the axilla and enters 
the arm by passing through the coracobrachialis muscle 
(Fig. 7.68). It passes diagonally down the arm in the plane 
between the biceps brachii and brachialis muscles. After 
giving rise to motor branches in the arm, it emerges later­
ally to the tendon of the biceps brachii muscle at the elbow, 
Fig. 7.68  Musculocutaneous, median, and ulnar nerves in the arm. 
Median nerve
Ulnar nerve
Medial epicondyle
Lateral cutaneous 
nerve of forearm
Musculocutaneous nerve
Musculocutaneous nerve
Medial cord
Lateral cord
Radial nerve
Medial intermuscular septum

=== PAGE 774 ===
Upper Limb
750
margin of the teres major muscle (Fig. 7.69). As it enters 
the arm, it lies posterior to the brachial artery. Accompa­
nied by the profunda brachii artery, the radial nerve enters 
the posterior compartment of the arm by passing through 
the triangular interval.
As the radial nerve passes diagonally, from medial to 
lateral, through the posterior compartment, it lies in the 
radial groove directly on bone. On the lateral side of the 
arm, it passes anteriorly through the lateral intermuscular 
septum and enters the anterior compartment where it lies 
between the brachialis muscle and a muscle of the posterior 
compartment of the forearm—the brachioradialis muscle, 
which attaches to the lateral supraepicondylar ridge of the 
humerus. The radial nerve enters the forearm anterior to 
the lateral epicondyle of the humerus, just deep to the 
brachioradialis muscle.
In the arm, the radial nerve has muscular and cutane­
ous branches (Fig. 7.69).
■	 Muscular branches include those to the triceps brachii, 
brachioradialis, and extensor carpi radialis longus 
muscles. In addition, the radial nerve contributes to the 
innervation of the lateral part of the brachialis muscle. 
One of the branches to the medial head of the triceps 
brachii muscle arises before the radial nerve’s entrance 
into the posterior compartment and passes vertically 
down the arm in association with the ulnar nerve.
■	 Cutaneous branches of the radial nerve that originate 
in the posterior compartment of the arm are the infe­
rior lateral cutaneous nerve of  the arm and the 
posterior cutaneous nerve of  the forearm, both of 
which penetrate through the lateral head of the triceps 
brachii muscle and the overlying deep fascia to become 
subcutaneous.
Median nerve
The median nerve enters the arm from the axilla at the 
inferior margin of the teres major muscle (Fig. 7.68). It 
passes vertically down the medial side of the arm in the 
anterior compartment and is related to the brachial artery 
throughout its course:
■	 In proximal regions, the median nerve is immediately 
lateral to the brachial artery.
■	 In more distal regions, the median nerve crosses to the 
medial side of the brachial artery and lies anterior to the 
elbow joint.
The median nerve has no major branches in the arm, 
but a branch to one of the muscles of the forearm, the 
pronator teres muscle, may originate from the nerve imme­
diately proximal to the elbow joint.
Ulnar nerve
The ulnar nerve enters the arm with the median nerve 
and axillary artery (Fig. 7.68). It passes through proximal 
regions medial to the axillary artery. In the middle of 
the arm, the ulnar nerve penetrates the medial intermus­
cular septum and enters the posterior compartment where 
it lies anterior to the medial head of the triceps brachii 
muscle. It passes posterior to the medial epicondyle of the 
humerus and then into the anterior compartment of the 
forearm.
The ulnar nerve has no major branches in the arm.
Radial nerve
The radial nerve originates from the posterior cord of the 
brachial plexus and enters the arm by crossing the inferior 
