=== PAGE 853 ===
Head and Neck
826
Other anatomically defined regions
In addition to the major compartments of the head, two 
other anatomically defined regions (infratemporal fossa 
and pterygopalatine fossa) of the head on each side are 
areas of transition from one compartment of the head to 
another (Fig. 8.2). The face and scalp also are anatomically 
defined areas of the head and are related to external 
surfaces.
The infratemporal fossa is an area between the pos­
terior aspect (ramus) of the mandible and a flat region of 
bone (lateral plate of the pterygoid process) just posterior 
to the upper jaw (maxilla). This fossa, bounded by bone and 
soft tissues, is a conduit for one of the major cranial 
nerves—the mandibular nerve (the mandibular division of 
the trigeminal nerve [V3]), which passes between the 
cranial and oral cavities.
The pterygopalatine fossa on each side is just poste­
rior to the upper jaw. This small fossa communicates with 
the cranial cavity, the infratemporal fossa, the orbit, the 
nasal cavity, and the oral cavity. A major structure passing 
through the pterygopalatine fossa is the maxillary nerve 
(the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve [V2]).
Fig. 8.1  Major compartments of the head and neck. 
Oral fissure
Nares
Nasal cavities and
paranasal sinuses
Orbits
Oral cavity
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Choanae
Ears
Cranial cavity
Fig. 8.2  Areas of transition from one compartment of the head to 
another. 
Infratemporal fossa
Lateral plate of
pterygoid process
Mandibular nerve [V3]
Pterygopalatine fossa
Maxillary nerve [V2]
Ramus of mandible

=== PAGE 857 ===
Head and Neck
830
Fig. 8.7  Skull. A. Bones. 
A
COMPONENT PARTS
Skull
The many bones of the head collectively form the skull (Fig. 
8.7A). Most of these bones are interconnected by sutures, 
which are immovable fibrous joints (Fig. 8.7B).
In the fetus and newborn, large membranous and unos­
sified gaps (fontanelles) between the bones of the skull, 
particularly between the large flat bones that cover the top 
of the cranial cavity (Fig. 8.7C), allow:
■	 the head to deform during its passage through the birth 
canal, and
■	 postnatal growth.
Most of the fontanelles close during the first year of life. 
Full ossification of the thin connective tissue ligaments 
separating the bones at the suture lines begins in the late 
twenties, and is normally completed in the fifth decade 
of life.
There are only three pairs of synovial joints on each side 
in the head. The largest are the temporomandibular joints 
between the lower jaw (mandible) and the temporal bone. 
The other two synovial joints are between the three tiny 
bones in the middle ear, the malleus, incus, and stapes.

=== PAGE 869 ===
Head and Neck
842
The boundaries of each anterior triangle are:
■	 the median vertical line of the neck,
■	 the inferior margin of the mandible, and
■	 the anterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
The posterior triangle is bounded by:
■	 the middle one-third of the clavicle,
■	 the anterior margin of the trapezius, and
■	 the posterior margin of the sternocleidomastoid.
Major structures that pass between the head and thorax 
can be accessed through the anterior triangle.
The posterior triangle in part lies over the axillary inlet, 
and is associated with structures (nerves and vessels) that 
pass into and out of the upper limb.
fluid from moving upward into the nasopharynx and nasal 
cavities.
The epiglottis of the larynx closes the laryngeal inlet 
and much of the laryngeal cavity becomes occluded by 
opposition of the vocal folds and soft tissue folds superior 
to them. In addition, the larynx is pulled up and forward 
to facilitate the moving of food and fluid over and around 
the closed larynx and into the esophagus.
In newborns, the larynx is high in the neck and the 
epiglottis is above the level of the soft palate (Fig. 8.16E). 
Babies can therefore suckle and breathe at the same time. 
Liquid flows around the larynx without any danger of 
entering the airway. During the second year of life, the 
larynx descends into the low cervical position characteris­
tic of adults.
Triangles of the neck
The two muscles (trapezius and sternocleidomastoid) that 
form part of the outer cervical collar divide the neck into 
anterior and posterior triangles on each side (Fig. 8.17).
Fig. 8.17  Anterior and posterior triangles of neck. 
Trapezius
Anterior
triangle
Posterior
triangle
Sternocleidomastoid
Axillary inlet
Superior thoracic aperture
Clavicle
Anterior midline
of neck
Clavicle
Trapezius
Sternocleidomastoid
Anterior triangle
Posterior triangle

=== PAGE 871 ===
Head and Neck
844
Frontal bone
The forehead consists of the frontal bone, which also 
forms the superior part of the rim of each orbit (Fig. 8.18).
Just superior to the rim of the orbit on each side are the 
raised superciliary arches. These are more pronounced 
in men than in women. Between these arches is a small 
depression (the glabella).
Clearly visible in the medial part of the superior rim of 
each orbit is the supra-orbital foramen (supra-orbital 
notch; Table 8.1).
Medially, the frontal bone projects inferiorly forming a 
part of the medial rim of the orbit.
Laterally, the zygomatic process of the frontal bone 
projects inferiorly forming the upper lateral rim of the 
Table 8.1  External foramina of the skull
Foramen
Structures passing through 
foramen
ANTERIOR VIEW
Supra-orbital foramen
Supra-orbital nerve and vessels
Infra-orbital foramen
Infra-orbital nerve and vessels
Mental foramen
Mental nerve and vessels
LATERAL VIEW
Zygomaticofacial foramen
Zygomaticofacial nerve
SUPERIOR VIEW
Parietal foramen
Emissary veins
INFERIOR VIEW
Incisive foramen
Nasopalatine nerve; sphenopalatine 
vessels
Greater palatine foramen
Greater palatine nerve and vessels
Lesser palatine foramen
Lesser palatine nerves and vessels
Pterygoid canal
Nerve of pterygoid canal and 
vessels
Foramen ovale
Mandibular nerve [V3]; lesser 
petrosal nerve
Foramen spinosum
Middle meningeal artery
Foramen lacerum
Filled with cartilage
Carotid canal
Internal carotid artery and nerve 
plexus
Foramen magnum
Continuation of brain and spinal 
cord; vertebral arteries and nerve 
plexuses; anterior spinal artery; 
posterior spinal arteries; roots of 
accessory nerve [XI]; meninges
Condylar canal
Emissary veins
Hypoglossal canal
Hypoglossal nerve [XII] and vessels
Jugular foramen
Internal jugular vein; inferior 
petrosal sinus; glossopharyngeal 
nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]; 
accessory nerve [XI]
Stylomastoid foramen
Facial nerve [VII]
orbit. This process articulates with the frontal process of 
the zygomatic bone.
Zygomatic and nasal bones
The lower lateral rim of the orbit, as well as the lateral part 
of the inferior rim of the orbit is formed by the zygomatic 
bone (the cheekbone).
Superiorly, in the nasal region the paired nasal bones 
articulate with each other in the midline, and with the 
frontal bone superiorly. The center of the frontonasal 
suture formed by the articulation of the nasal bones and 
the frontal bone is the nasion.
Laterally, each nasal bone articulates with the frontal 
process of each maxilla.
Inferiorly, the piriform aperture is the large opening 
in the nasal region and the anterior opening of the nasal 
cavity. It is bounded superiorly by the nasal bones and 
laterally and inferiorly by each maxilla.
Visible through the piriform aperture are the fused 
nasal crests, forming the lower part of the bony nasal 
septum and ending anteriorly as the anterior nasal 
spine, and the paired inferior nasal conchae.
Maxillae
The part of the face between the orbit and the upper teeth 
and each upper jaw is formed by the paired maxillae.
Superiorly, each maxilla contributes to the inferior and 
medial rims of the orbit.
Laterally, the zygomatic process of each maxilla 
articulates with the zygomatic bone and medially, the 
frontal process of each maxilla articulates with the 
frontal bone.
Inferiorly, the part of each maxilla, lateral to the opening 
of the nasal cavity, is the body of  the maxilla.
On the anterior surface of the body of the maxilla, just 
below the inferior rim of the orbit, is the infra-orbital 
foramen (Table 8.1).
Inferiorly, each maxilla ends as the alveolar process, 
which contains the teeth and forms the upper jaw.
Mandible
The lower jaw (mandible) is the most inferior structure 
in the anterior view of the skull. It consists of the body 
of  the mandible anteriorly and the ramus of  the man­
dible posteriorly. These meet posteriorly at the angle of  
the mandible. All these parts of the mandible are visible, 
to some extent, in the anterior view.
The body of the mandible is arbitrarily divided into 
two parts:
■	 The lower part is the base of  the mandible.
■	 The upper part is the alveolar part of  the mandible.

=== PAGE 874 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skull
8
847
Posterior view
The occipital, parietal, and temporal bones are seen in the 
posterior view of the skull.
Occipital bone
Centrally the flat or squamous part of  the occipital 
bone is the main structure in this view of the skull (Fig. 
8.20). It articulates superiorly with the paired parietal 
bones at the lambdoid suture and laterally with each 
temporal bone at the occipitomastoid sutures. Along the 
lambdoid suture small islands of bone (sutural bones or 
wormian bones) may be observed.
Several bony landmarks are visible on the occipital 
bone. There is a midline projection (the external occipital 
protuberance) with curved lines extending laterally from 
Mandible
The final bony structure visible in a lateral view of the skull 
is the mandible. Inferiorly in the anterior part of this view, 
it consists of the anterior body of the mandible, a posterior 
ramus of the mandible, and the angle of the mandible 
where the inferior margin of the mandible meets the pos­
terior margin of the ramus (Fig. 8.19).
The teeth are in the alveolar part of the body of the 
mandible and the mental protuberance is visible in this 
view.
The mental foramen is on the lateral surface of the body, 
and on the superior part of the ramus condylar and coro­
noid processes extend upward.
The condylar process is involved in articulation of the 
mandible with the temporal bone, and the coronoid process 
is the point of attachment for the temporalis muscle.
Fig. 8.20  Posterior view of the skull. 
Sagittal suture
Parietal bone
Squamous part of
occipital bone
Superior nuchal line
Occipitomastoid suture
Inferior nuchal line
Mastoid notch
Mastoid process
External occipital
 protuberance
Lambdoid suture
Parietal bone
Sutural bone
Inion
External occipital crest

=== PAGE 876 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skull
8
849
Fig. 8.22  Calvaria. 
Pericranium
Scalp
External table
Diploë
Internal table
Dura
■	 an anterior part, which includes the teeth and the 
hard palate,
■	 a middle part, which extends from behind the 
hard palate to the anterior margin of the foramen 
magnum, and
■	 a posterior part, which extends from the anterior 
edge of the foramen magnum to the superior nuchal 
lines.
Anterior part
The main features of the anterior part of the base of the 
skull are the teeth and the hard palate.
The teeth project from the alveolar processes of the 
two maxillae. These processes are together arranged in a 
U-shaped alveolar arch that borders the hard palate on 
three sides (Fig. 8.23).
The hard palate is composed of the palatine proc­
esses of each maxilla anteriorly and the horizontal 
plates of each palatine bone posteriorly.
The paired palatine processes of each maxilla meet in 
the midline at the intermaxillary suture, the paired 
maxillae and the paired palatine bones meet at the pala­
tomaxillary suture, and the paired horizontal plates of 
each palatine bone meet in the midline at the interpala­
tine suture.
Several additional features are also visible when the 
hard palate is examined:
■	 the incisive fossa in the anterior midline immediately 
posterior to the teeth, the walls of which contain inci­
sive foramina (the openings of the incisive canals, 
which are passageways between the hard palate and 
nasal cavity);
■	 the greater palatine foramina near the posterolateral 
border of the hard palate on each side, which lead to 
greater palatine canals;
■	 just posterior to the greater palatine foramina, the 
lesser palatine foramina in the pyramidal process 
of each palatine bone, which lead to lesser palatine 
canals;
■	 a midline pointed projection (the posterior nasal 
spine) in the free posterior border of the hard palate.
Middle part
The middle part of the base of the skull is complex:
■	 Forming the anterior half are the vomer and sphenoid 
bones.
■	 Forming the posterior half are the occipital and paired 
temporal bones.
Anterior half
Vomer
Anteriorly, the small vomer is in the midline, resting on the 
sphenoid bone (Fig. 8.23). It contributes to the formation 
of the bony nasal septum separating the two choanae.
Sphenoid
Most of the anterior part of the middle part of the base of 
the skull consists of the sphenoid bone.
The sphenoid bone is made up of a centrally placed 
body, paired greater and lesser wings projecting later­
ally from the body, and two downward projecting ptery­
goid processes immediately lateral to each choana.
Three parts of the sphenoid bone, the body, greater 
wings, and pterygoid processes, are seen in the inferior 
view of the skull (Fig. 8.23). The lesser wing of the sphe­
noid is not seen in the inferior view.
Body
The body of the sphenoid is a centrally placed cube of bone 
containing two large air sinuses separated by a septum.
It articulates anteriorly with the vomer, ethmoid, and 
palatine bones, posterolaterally with the temporal bones, 
and posteriorly with the occipital bone.
Pterygoid processes
Extending downward from the junction of the body and the 
greater wings are the pterygoid processes (Fig. 8.23). Each 
of these processes consists of a narrow medial plate and 
broader lateral plate separated by the pterygoid fossa.
Each medial plate of the pterygoid process ends 
inferiorly with a hook-like projection, the pterygoid 
hamulus, and divides superiorly to form the small, shallow 
scaphoid fossa.

=== PAGE 877 ===
Head and Neck
850
Fig. 8.23  Inferior view of the skull. 
Incisive fossa
Hard palate (maxilla)
Hard palate (palatine bone)
Greater palatine foramen
Hamulus
Lesser palatine foramen
Lateral plate of pterygoid
process
Medial plate of pterygoid
process
Vomer
Body of sphenoid
Articular tubercle
Mandibular fossa
Foramen ovale
Foramen spinosum
Petrous part of
temporal bone
Squamous part of
temporal bone
Styloid process
Stylomastoid foramen
Jugular foramen
Carotid canal
Inferior nuchal line
Occipital condyle
External occipital protuberance
Superior nuchal line
External occipital crest
Foramen magnum
Pharyngeal tubercle
Hypoglossal canal
Mastoid process
Mastoid notch
Basilar part of 
occipital bone
Foramen lacerum
Groove for auditory tube
Opening of
 pterygoid canal
Pterygoid process
Scaphoid fossa
Pterygoid fossa
Greater wing
 (of sphenoid bone)
Posterior nasal aperture (choana)
Pyramidal process of palatine bone
Alveolar arch
Posterior nasal spine
Just superior to the scaphoid fossa, at the root of the 
medial plate of the pterygoid process is the opening of 
the pterygoid canal, which passes forward from near the 
anterior margin of the foramen lacerum.
Greater wing
Lateral to the lateral plate of the pterygoid process is the 
greater wing of the sphenoid (Fig. 8.23), which not only 
forms a part of the base of the skull but also continues 
laterally to form part of the lateral wall of the skull. It 
articulates laterally and posteriorly with parts of the tem­
poral bone.
Important features visible on the surface of the greater 
wing in an inferior view of the skull are the foramen ovale 
and the foramen spinosum on the posterolateral border 

=== PAGE 878 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skull
8
851
to the superior nuchal lines (Fig. 8.23). It consists of parts 
of the occipital bone centrally and the temporal bones 
laterally.
Occipital bone
The occipital bone is the major bony element of this part 
of the base of the skull (Fig. 8.23). It has four parts orga­
nized around the foramen magnum, which is a prominent 
feature of this part of the base of the skull and through 
which the brain and spinal cord are continuous.
The parts of the occipital bone are the squamous part, 
which is posterior to the foramen magnum, the lateral 
parts, which are lateral to the foramen magnum, and the 
basilar part, which is anterior to the foramen magnum 
(Fig. 8.23).
The squamous and lateral parts are components of the 
posterior part of the base of the skull.
The most visible feature of the squamous part of the 
occipital bone when examining the inferior view of the 
skull is a ridge of bone (the external occipital crest), which 
extends downward from the external occipital protuber­
ance toward the foramen magnum. The inferior nuchal 
lines arc laterally from the midpoint of the crest.
Immediately lateral to the foramen magnum are the 
lateral parts of the occipital bones, which contain numer­
ous important structural features.
On each anterolateral border of the foramen magnum 
are the rounded occipital condyles (Fig. 8.23). These 
paired structures articulate with the atlas (vertebra CI). 
Posterior to each condyle is a depression (the condylar 
fossa) containing a condylar canal, and anterior and 
superior to each condyle is the large hypoglossal canal. 
Lateral to each hypoglossal canal is a large, irregular 
jugular foramen formed by opposition of the jugular 
notch of the occipital bone and jugular notch of the 
temporal bone.
Temporal bone
Laterally in the posterior part of the base of the skull is the 
temporal bone. The parts of the temporal bone seen in this 
location are the mastoid part of the petromastoid part and 
the styloid process (Fig. 8.23).
The lateral edge of the mastoid part is identified by the 
large cone-shaped mastoid process projecting from its 
inferior surface. This prominent bony structure is the point 
of attachment for several muscles. On the medial aspect of 
the mastoid process is the deep mastoid notch, which is 
also an attachment point for a muscle.
Anteromedial to the mastoid process is the needle-
shaped styloid process projecting from the lower border of 
the temporal bone. The styloid process is also a point of 
attachment for numerous muscles and ligaments.
extending outward from the upper end of the lateral plate 
of the pterygoid process.
Posterior half
In the posterior half of the middle part of the base of the 
skull are the occipital bone and the paired temporal bones 
(Fig. 8.23).
Occipital bone
The occipital bone, or more specifically its basilar part, is 
in the midline immediately posterior to the body of the 
sphenoid. It extends posteriorly to the foramen magnum 
and is bounded laterally by the temporal bones.
Prominent on the basilar part of the occipital bone is 
the pharyngeal tubercle, a bony protuberance for the 
attachment of parts of the pharynx to the base of the skull 
(Fig. 8.23).
Temporal bone
Immediately lateral to the basilar part of the occipital 
bone is the petrous part of the petromastoid part of each 
temporal bone.
Wedge-shaped in its appearance, with its apex antero­
medial, the petrous part of the temporal bone is between 
the greater wing of the sphenoid anteriorly and the basilar 
part of the occipital bone posteriorly. The apex forms one 
of the boundaries of the foramen lacerum, an irregular 
opening filled in life with cartilage (Fig. 8.23).
The other boundaries of the foramen lacerum are the 
basilar part of the occipital bone medially and the body of 
the sphenoid anteriorly.
Posterolateral from the foramen lacerum along the 
petrous part of the temporal bone is the large circular 
opening for the carotid canal.
Between the petrous part of the temporal bone and the 
greater wing of the sphenoid is a groove for the cartilagi­
nous part of the pharyngotympanic tube (auditory 
tube). This groove continues posterolaterally into a bony 
canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone for the 
pharyngotympanic tube.
Just lateral to the greater wing of the sphenoid is the 
squamous part of the temporal bone, which participates in 
the temporomandibular joint. It contains the mandibular 
fossa, which is a concavity where the head of the mandible 
articulates with the base of the skull. An important feature 
of this articulation is the prominent articular tubercle, 
which is the downward projection of the anterior border 
of the mandibular fossa (Fig. 8.23).
Posterior part
The posterior part of the base of the skull extends from 
the anterior edge of the foramen magnum posteriorly 

=== PAGE 902 ===
8
875
Regional Anatomy  •  Brain and Its Blood Supply
Fig. 8.44  Veins, meninges, and dural venous sinuses. 
Sigmoid sinus
Inferior sagittal sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Basilar sinus
Sphenoparietal sinus
Intercavernous sinus
Cavernous sinus
Ophthalmic vein
Pterygoid plexus of veins
Superior petrosal sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Inferior petrosal sinus
Right transverse sinus
Great cerebral vein
Confluence of sinuses
Straight sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Table 8.3  Dural venous sinuses
Dural sinus
Location
Receives
Superior sagittal
Superior border of falx cerebri
Superior cerebral, diploic, and emissary veins and CSF
Inferior sagittal
Inferior margin of falx cerebri
A few cerebral veins and veins from the falx cerebri
Straight
Junction of falx cerebri and tentorium cerebelli
Inferior sagittal sinus, great cerebral vein, posterior 
cerebral veins, superior cerebellar veins, and veins from 
the falx cerebri
Occipital
In falx cerebelli against occipital bone
Communicates inferiorly with vertebral plexus of veins
Confluence of sinuses
Dilated space at the internal occipital protuberance
Superior sagittal, straight, and occipital sinuses
Transverse (right and left)
Horizontal extensions from the confluence of sinuses 
along the posterior and lateral attachments of the 
tentorium cerebelli
Drainage from confluence of sinuses (right—transverse 
and usually superior sagittal sinuses; left—transverse and 
usually straight sinuses); also superior petrosal sinus, and 
inferior cerebral, cerebellar, diploic, and emissary veins
Sigmoid (right and left)
Continuation of transverse sinuses to internal jugular 
vein; groove of parietal, temporal, and occipital 
bones
Transverse sinuses, and cerebral, cerebellar, diploic, and 
emissary veins
Cavernous (paired)
Lateral aspect of body of sphenoid
Cerebral and ophthalmic veins, sphenoparietal sinuses, 
and emissary veins from pterygoid plexus of veins
Intercavernous
Crossing sella turcica
Interconnect cavernous sinuses
Sphenoparietal (paired)
Inferior surface of lesser wings of sphenoid
Diploic and meningeal veins
Superior petrosal (paired)
Superior margin of petrous part of temporal bone
Cavernous sinus, and cerebral and cerebellar veins
Inferior petrosal (paired)
Groove between petrous part of temporal bone and 
occipital bone ending in internal jugular vein
Cavernous sinus, cerebellar veins, and veins from the 
internal ear and brainstem
Basilar
Clivus, just posterior to sella turcica of sphenoid
Connect bilateral inferior petrosal sinuses and 
communicate with vertebral plexus of veins

=== PAGE 903 ===
Head and Neck
876
and occipital bones, before ending at the beginning of the 
internal jugular veins. The sigmoid sinuses also receive 
blood from cerebral, cerebellar, diploic, and emissary veins.
Cavernous sinuses
The paired cavernous sinuses are against the lateral aspect 
of the body of the sphenoid bone on either side of the sella 
turcica (Figs. 8.45 and 8.46). They are of great clinical 
importance because of their connections and the struc­
tures that pass through them.
The cavernous sinuses receive blood not only from 
cerebral veins but also from the ophthalmic veins (from the 
orbit) and emissary veins (from the pterygoid plexus 
of veins in the infratemporal fossa). These connections 
provide pathways for infections to pass from extracranial 
sites into intracranial locations. In addition, because struc­
tures pass through the cavernous sinuses and are located 
in the walls of these sinuses they are vulnerable to injury 
due to inflammation.
Structures passing through each cavernous sinus are:
■	 the internal carotid artery, and
■	 the abducent nerve [VI].
Superior sagittal sinus
The superior sagittal sinus is in the superior border of the 
falx cerebri (Fig. 8.44). It begins anteriorly at the foramen 
cecum, where it may receive a small emissary vein from the 
nasal cavity, and ends posteriorly in the confluence of 
sinuses, usually bending to the right to empty into the right 
transverse sinus. The superior sagittal sinus communicates 
with lateral extensions (lateral lacunae) of the sinus con­
taining numerous arachnoid granulations.
The superior sagittal sinus usually receives cerebral 
veins from the superior surface of the cerebral hemispheres, 
diploic and emissary veins, and veins from the falx cerebri.
Inferior sagittal and straight sinuses
The inferior sagittal sinus is in the inferior margin of the 
falx cerebri (Fig. 8.44). It receives a few cerebral veins and 
veins from the falx cerebri, and ends posteriorly at the 
anterior edge of the tentorium cerebelli, where it is joined 
by the great cerebral vein and together with the great 
cerebral vein forms the straight sinus (Fig. 8.44).
The straight sinus continues posteriorly along the junc­
tion of the falx cerebri and the tentorium cerebelli and ends 
in the confluence of sinuses, usually bending to the left to 
empty into the left transverse sinus.
The straight sinus usually receives blood from the infe­
rior sagittal sinus, cerebral veins (from the posterior part 
of the cerebral hemispheres), the great cerebral vein 
(draining deep areas of the cerebral hemispheres), superior 
cerebellar veins, and veins from the falx cerebri.
Confluence of  sinuses, transverse and 
sigmoid sinuses
The superior sagittal and straight sinuses, and the occipital 
sinus (in the falx cerebelli) empty into the confluence of 
sinuses, which is a dilated space at the internal occipital 
protuberance (Fig. 8.44) and is drained by the right and 
left transverse sinuses.
The paired transverse sinuses extend in horizontal 
directions from the confluence of sinuses where the tento­
rium cerebelli joins the lateral and posterior walls of the 
cranial cavity.
The right transverse sinus usually receives blood from 
the superior sagittal sinus and the left transverse sinus 
usually receives blood from the straight sinus.
The transverse sinuses also receive blood from the 
superior petrosal sinus, veins from the inferior parts of the 
cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, and diploic and 
emissary veins.
As the transverse sinuses leave the surface of the 
occipital bone, they become the sigmoid sinuses (Fig. 8.44), 
which turn inferiorly, grooving the parietal, temporal, 
Fig. 8.45  Cavernous sinuses. 
Pituitary gland
Internal carotid artery
Dura mater
Abducent nerve  [VI]
Maxillary division of trigeminal nerve [V2]
Cavernous (venous) sinuses
Sphenoidal (paranasal) sinuses
Ophthalmic division of trigeminal nerve [V1]
Trochlear nerve [IV]
Oculomotor nerve [III]
Diaphragma sellae

=== PAGE 910 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Cranial Nerves
8
883
The special sensory components are associated with 
hearing, seeing, smelling, balancing, and tasting.
Special motor components include those that innervate 
skeletal muscles derived embryologically from the pharyn­
geal arches and not from somites.
In human embryology, six pharyngeal arches are desig­
nated, but the fifth pharyngeal arch never develops. Each 
of the pharyngeal arches that does develop is associated 
with a developing cranial nerve or one of its branches. 
CRANIAL NERVES
The 12 pairs of cranial nerves are part of the peripheral 
nervous system (PNS) and pass through foramina or fis­
sures in the cranial cavity. All nerves except one, the acces­
sory nerve [XI], originate from the brain.
In addition to having somatic and visceral components 
similar to those of spinal nerves, some cranial nerves also 
contain special sensory and motor components (Tables 8.4 
and 8.5).
Table 8.4  Cranial nerve functional components
Functional component
Abbreviation
General function
Cranial nerves containing component
General somatic afferent
GSA
Perception of touch, pain, temperature
Trigeminal nerve [V]; facial nerve [VII]; 
glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]
General visceral afferent
GVA
Sensory input from viscera
Glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]
Special afferent*
SA
Smell, taste, vision, hearing, and balance
Olfactory nerve [I]; optic nerve [II]; facial 
nerve [VII]; vestibulocochlear nerve [VIII]; 
glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]
General somatic efferent
GSE
Motor innervation to skeletal (voluntary) 
muscles
Oculomotor nerve [III]; trochlear nerve [IV]; 
abducent nerve [VI]; hypoglossal nerve [XII]
General visceral efferent
GVE
Motor innervation to smooth muscle, 
heart muscle, and glands
Oculomotor nerve [III]; facial nerve [VII]; 
glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]
Branchial efferent**
BE
Motor innervation to skeletal muscles 
derived from pharyngeal arch mesoderm
Trigeminal nerve [V]; facial nerve [VII]; 
glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]; vagus nerve [X]; 
accessory nerve [XI] (see Diogo R et al. Nature 
2015;520:466–473)
Other terminology used when describing functional components:
*Special sensory, or special visceral afferent (SVA): smell, taste. Special somatic afferent (SSA): vision, hearing, balance.
**Special visceral efferent (SVE) or branchial motor.
Table 8.5  Cranial nerves (see Table 8.4 for abbreviations)
Nerve
COMPONENT
Exit from skull
Function
Afferent
Efferent
Olfactory nerve [I]
SA
Cribriform plate of ethmoid bone
Smell
Optic nerve [II]
SA
Optic canal
Vision
Oculomotor nerve [III]
GSE, GVE
Superior orbital fissure
GSE—innervates levator palpebrae superioris, superior rectus, 
inferior rectus, medial rectus, and inferior oblique muscles
GVE—innervates sphincter pupillae for pupillary constriction; 
ciliary muscles for accommodation of the lens for near vision
Trochlear nerve [IV]
GSE
Superior orbital fissure
Innervates superior oblique muscle
Trigeminal nerve [V]
GSA
BE
Superior orbital fissure—
ophthalmic division [V1]
Foramen rotundum—maxillary 
nerve [V2]
Foramen ovale—mandibular 
division [V3]
GSA—sensory from: ophthalmic division [V1]—eyes, 
conjunctiva, orbital contents, nasal cavity, frontal sinus, 
ethmoidal cells, upper eyelid, dorsum of nose, anterior part of 
scalp, dura in anterior cranial fossa, superior part of tentorium 
cerebelli; maxillary nerve [V2]—dura in middle cranial fossa, 
nasopharynx, palate, nasal cavity, upper teeth, maxillary sinus, 
skin covering the side of the nose, lower eyelid, cheek, upper 
lip; mandibular division [V3]—skin of lower face, cheek, lower 
lip, anterior part of external ear, part of external acoustic 
meatus, temporal fossa, anterior two-thirds of tongue, lower 
teeth, mastoid air cells, mucous membranes of cheek, 
mandible, dura in middle cranial fossa
BE—innervates temporalis, masseter, medial and lateral 
pterygoids, tensor tympani, tensor veli palatini, anterior belly of 
digastric, and mylohyoid muscles
Continued

=== PAGE 911 ===
Head and Neck
884
Nerve
COMPONENT
Exit from skull
Function
Afferent
Efferent
Abducent nerve [VI]
GSE
Superior orbital fissure
Innervates lateral rectus muscle
Facial nerve [VII]
GSA, SA
GVE, BE
Stylomastoid foramen (nerve 
leaves cranial cavity through 
internal acoustic meatus and gives 
rise to branches in the facial canal 
of the temporal bone prior to 
exiting through the stylomastoid 
foramen; these branches leave the 
skull through other fissures and 
canals.)
GSA—sensory from part of external acoustic meatus and 
deeper parts of auricle
SA—taste from anterior two-thirds of tongue
GVE—innervates lacrimal gland, submandibular and sublingual 
salivary glands, and mucous membranes of nasal cavity, hard 
and soft palates
BE—innervates muscles of face (muscles of facial expression) 
and scalp derived from the second pharyngeal arch, and 
stapedius, posterior belly of digastric, stylohyoid muscles
Vestibulocochlear 
nerve [VIII]
SA
(Nerve leaves cranial cavity 
through internal acoustic meatus)
Vestibular division—balance
Cochlear division—hearing
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve [IX]
GVA, SA, 
GSA
GVE, BE
Jugular foramen
GVA—sensory from carotid body and sinus
GSA—posterior one-third of tongue, palatine tonsils, 
oropharynx, and mucosa of middle ear, pharyngotympanic 
tube, and mastoid air cells
SA—taste from posterior one-third of tongue
GVE—innervates parotid salivary gland
BE—innervates stylopharyngeus muscle
Vagus nerve [X]
GSA, 
GVA, SA
GVE, BE
Jugular foramen
GSA—sensory from larynx, laryngopharynx, deeper parts of 
auricle, part of external acoustic meatus, and dura in posterior 
cranial fossa
GVA—sensory from aortic body chemoreceptors and aortic 
arch baroreceptors, esophagus, bronchi, lungs, heart, and 
abdominal viscera of the foregut and midgut
SA—taste from the epiglottis and pharynx
GVE—innervates smooth muscle and glands in the pharynx, 
larynx, thoracic viscera, and abdominal viscera of the foregut 
and midgut
BE—innervates one tongue muscle (palatoglossus), muscles of 
soft palate (except tensor veli palatini), pharynx (except 
stylopharyngeus), and larynx
Accessory nerve [XI]
BE
Jugular foramen
Innervates sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles [for 
classification as BE see Diogo R et al. Nature 2015;520:466–473.]
Hypoglossal nerve [XII]
GSE
Hypoglossal canal
Innervates hyoglossus, genioglossus, and styloglossus muscles 
and all intrinsic muscles of the tongue
Table 8.5  Cranial nerves (see Table 8.4 for abbreviations)—cont’d

=== PAGE 914 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Cranial Nerves
8
887
Maxillary nerve [V2]
The maxillary nerve [V2] passes forward in the dura mater 
of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus just inferior to the 
ophthalmic nerve [V1] (see Fig. 8.45), leaves the cranial 
cavity through the foramen rotundum (Fig. 8.53), and 
enters the pterygopalatine fossa.
The maxillary nerve [V2] receives sensory branches 
from the dura in the middle cranial fossa, the nasopharynx, 
the palate, the nasal cavity, teeth of the upper jaw, maxil­
lary sinus, and skin covering the side of the nose, the lower 
eyelid, the cheek, and the upper lip.
Mandibular nerve [V3]
The mandibular nerve [V3] leaves the inferior margin of 
the trigeminal ganglion and leaves the skull through the 
foramen ovale (Fig. 8.53), and enters the infratemporal 
fossa.
The motor root of the trigeminal nerve also passes 
through the foramen ovale and unites with the sensory 
component of the mandibular nerve [V3] outside the skull. 
Thus the mandibular nerve [V3] is the only division of the 
trigeminal nerve that contains a motor component.
Outside the skull the motor fibers innervate the four 
muscles of mastication (temporalis, masseter, and medial 
and lateral pterygoids), as well as the tensor tympani 
muscle, the tensor veli palatini muscle, the anterior belly 
of the digastric muscle, and the mylohyoid muscle.
The mandibular nerve [V3] also receives sensory 
branches from the skin of the lower face, cheek, lower lip, 
anterior part of the external ear, part of the external 
acoustic meatus and the temporal region, the anterior 
two-thirds of the tongue, the teeth of the lower jaw, the 
mastoid air cells, the mucous membranes of the cheek, the 
mandible, and dura in the middle cranial fossa.
Abducent nerve [VI]
The abducent nerve [VI] carries GSE fibers to innervate 
the lateral rectus muscle in the orbit. It arises from the 
brainstem between the pons and medulla and passes 
forward, piercing the dura covering the clivus (Figs. 8.53 
and 8.54). Continuing upward in a dural canal, it crosses 
the superior edge of the petrous part of the temporal bone, 
enters and crosses the cavernous sinus (see Fig. 8.45) just 
inferolateral to the internal carotid artery, and enters the 
orbit through the superior orbital fissure.
Facial nerve [VII]
The facial nerve [VII] carries GSA, SA, GVE, and BE 
fibers:
Trigeminal nerve [V]
The trigeminal nerve [V] is the major general sensory 
nerve of the head and also innervates muscles that move 
the lower jaw. It carries general somatic afferent (GSA) and 
branchial efferent (BE) fibers:
■	 The GSA fibers provide sensory input from the face, 
anterior one-half of the scalp, mucous membranes of 
the oral and nasal cavities and the paranasal sinuses, 
the nasopharynx, part of the ear and external acoustic 
meatus, part of the tympanic membrane, the orbital 
contents and conjunctiva, and the dura mater in the 
anterior and middle cranial fossae.
■	 The BE fibers innervate the muscles of mastication; the 
tensor tympani, tensor veli palatini, and mylohyoid 
muscles; and the anterior belly of the digastric muscle.
The trigeminal nerve exits from the anterolateral surface 
of the pons as a large sensory root and a small motor root 
(Fig. 8.54). These roots continue forward out of the poste­
rior cranial fossa and into the middle cranial fossa by 
passing over the medial tip of the petrous part of the 
temporal bone (Fig. 8.53).
In the middle cranial fossa the sensory root expands into 
the trigeminal ganglion (Fig. 8.53), which contains cell 
bodies for the sensory neurons in the trigeminal nerve and 
is comparable to a spinal ganglion. The ganglion is in a 
depression (the trigeminal depression) on the anterior 
surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone, in a dural 
cave (the trigeminal cave). The motor root is below and 
completely separate from the sensory root at this point.
Arising from the anterior border of the trigeminal 
ganglion are the three terminal divisions of the trigeminal 
nerve, which in descending order are:
■	 the ophthalmic nerve (ophthalmic division [V1]).
■	 the maxillary nerve (maxillary division [V2]), and
■	 the mandibular nerve (mandibular division [V3]).
Ophthalmic nerve [V1]
The ophthalmic nerve [V1] passes forward in the dura of 
the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus (see Fig. 8.45), 
leaves the cranial cavity, and enters the orbit through the 
superior orbital fissure (Fig. 8.53).
The ophthalmic nerve [V1] carries sensory branches 
from the eyes, conjunctiva, and orbital contents, including 
the lacrimal gland. It also receives sensory branches from 
the nasal cavity, frontal sinus, ethmoidal cells, falx cerebri, 
dura in the anterior cranial fossa and superior parts of the 
tentorium cerebelli, upper eyelid, dorsum of the nose, and 
the anterior part of the scalp.

=== PAGE 916 ===
889
In the clinic
Cranial nerve lesions
Cranial Nerve
Clinical Findings
Example of Lesion
Olfactory nerve [I]
Loss of smell (anosmia)
Injury to the cribriform plate; congenital absence
Optic nerve [II]
Blindness/visual field abnormalities, loss of 
pupillary constriction
Direct trauma to the orbit; disruption of the optic 
pathway
Oculomotor nerve 
[III]
Dilated pupil, ptosis, loss of normal pupillary 
reflex, eye moves down inferiorly and laterally 
(down and out)
Pressure from an aneurysm arising from the 
posterior communicating, posterior cerebral, or 
superior cerebellar artery; pressure from a 
herniating cerebral uncus (false localizing sign); 
cavernous sinus mass or thrombosis
Trochlear nerve [IV]
Inability to look inferiorly when the eye is 
adducted (down and in)
Along the course of the nerve around the 
brainstem; orbital fracture
Trigeminal nerve [V]
Loss of sensation and pain in the region 
supplied by the three divisions of the nerve 
over the face; loss of motor function of the 
muscles of mastication on the side of the lesion
Typically, in the region of the trigeminal ganglion, 
though local masses around the foramina through 
which the divisions pass can produce symptoms
Abducent nerve [VI]
Inability of lateral eye movement
Brain lesion or cavernous sinus lesion extending 
onto the orbit
Facial nerve [VII]
Paralysis of facial muscles
Abnormal taste sensation from the anterior 
two-thirds of the tongue and dry conjunctivae
Paralysis of contralateral facial muscles below 
the eye
Damage to the branches within the parotid gland
Injury to temporal bone; viral inflammation of 
nerve
Brainstem injury
Vestibulocochlear 
nerve [VIII]
Progressive unilateral hearing loss and tinnitus 
(ringing in the ear)
Tumor at the cerebellopontine angle
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve [IX]
Loss of taste to the posterior one-third of the 
tongue and sensation of the soft palate
Brainstem lesion; penetrating neck injury
Vagus nerve [X]
Soft palate deviation with deviation of the uvula 
to the normal side; vocal cord paralysis
Brainstem lesion; penetrating neck injury
Accessory nerve [XI]
Paralysis of sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles
Penetrating injury to the posterior triangle of the 
neck
Hypoglossal nerve 
[XII]
Atrophy of ipsilateral muscles of the tongue and 
deviation toward the affected side; speech 
disturbance
Penetrating injury to the neck and skull base 
pathology
In the clinic
Overview of cranial nerves
Cranial nerve reflexes
Corneal (blink) reflex
■	 Afferent—Trigeminal nerve (CN V)
■	 Efferent—Facial nerve (CN VII)
Gag reflex
■	 Afferent—Glossopharyngeal nerve (CN IX)
■	 Efferent—Vagus nerve (CN X)
Pupillary (light) reflex
■	 Afferent—optic nerve (CN II)
■	 Efferent—oculomotor nerve (CN III)
(continues)

=== PAGE 917 ===
In the clinic—cont’d
Efferent (motor) fibers
V3
V3
V2
V1
Afferent (sensory) fibers
Olfactory nerve [I]
Special sensory – smell
Optic nerve [II]
Special sensory – vision
Trigeminal nerve [V] sensory root
Somatic sensory – eyes, orbital contents, face, 
sinuses, teeth, nasal cavities, oral cavity, anterior 
2/3 of tongue, nasopharynx, dura, anterior part of 
external ear,and part of external acoustic meatus
Trigeminal nerve [V] motor root
Branchial motor – the four muscles of mastication
(medial pterygoid, lateral pterygoid, masseter, temporalis)
and mylohyoid, anterior belly of digastric, tensor tympani,
and tensor veli palatini
Oculomotor nerve [III]
Somatic motor – five extra-ocular muscles (superior rectus, medial rectus,
inferior oblique, inferior rectus, and levator palpebrae superioris)
Visceral motor – ciliary muscles and sphincter pupillae muscles
Trochlear nerve [IV]
Somatic motor – one extra-ocular
muscle (superior oblique)
Abducent nerve [VI]
Somatic motor – one extra-ocular
muscle (lateral rectus)
Fig. 8.55  Overview of cranial nerves. 

=== PAGE 918 ===
Glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]
Special sensory – taste (posterior 1/3 of tongue)
Somatic sensory – posterior 1/3 of tongue, oropharynx,
palatine tonsil, middle ear, pharyngotympanic tube, and
mastoid air cells
Branchial motor –  stylopharyngeus
Visceral motor – (parasympathetic) – secretomotor to the
parotid gland
Visceral sensory – from carotid body and sinus
Facial nerve [VII] 
Branchial motor – all muscles of facial expression, and
stapedius, stylohyoid, and posterior belly of digastric
Facial nerve [VII] (intermediate nerve)
Special sensory – taste (anterior 2/3 of tongue)
Somatic sensory – part of external acoustic meatus and
deeper parts of auricle
Visceral motor (parasympathetic) – secretomotor to all
salivary glands except for parotid gland; all mucous glands
associated with the oral and nasal cavities; lacrimal gland
Vestibulocochlear nerve [VIII]
Special sensory – hearing and balance
Hypoglossal nerve [XII]
Somatic motor – all muscles of the
tongue except palatoglossus
Accessory nerve [XI]
Branchial motor – sternocleidomastoid
and trapezius
Vagus nerve [X]
Somatic sensory – larynx, laryngopharynx, deeper parts of
auricle, and part of external acoustic meatus
Special sensory – taste from epiglottis and pharynx
Branchial motor –  all muscles of pharynx except for 
stylopharyngeus; all muscles of the soft palate except 
for tensor veli palatini, all intrinsic muscles of larynx
Visceral motor – (parasympathetic) – thoracic viscera and
abdominal viscera to end of midgut
Visceral sensory – thoracic viscera and abdominal viscera
to end of midgut, chemo- and baroreceptors
(and in some cases carotid body)

=== PAGE 919 ===
Head and Neck
892
The glossopharyngeal nerve [IX] arises as several 
rootlets on the anterolateral surface of the upper medulla 
oblongata (Fig. 8.54). The rootlets cross the posterior 
cranial fossa and enter the jugular foramen (Fig. 8.53). 
Within the jugular foramen, and before exiting from 
it, the rootlets merge to form the glossopharyngeal 
nerve.
Within or immediately outside the jugular foramen are 
two ganglia (the superior and inferior ganglia), which 
contain the cell bodies of the sensory neurons in the glos­
sopharyngeal nerve [IX].
Tympanic nerve
Branching from the glossopharyngeal nerve [IX] either 
within or immediately outside the jugular foramen is the 
tympanic nerve. This branch reenters the temporal 
bone, enters the middle ear cavity, and participates in 
the formation of the tympanic plexus. Within the 
middle ear cavity it provides sensory innervation to the 
mucosa of the cavity, pharyngotympanic tube, and mastoid 
air cells.
The tympanic nerve also contributes GVE fibers, which 
leave the tympanic plexus in the lesser petrosal nerve—a 
small nerve that exits the temporal bone, enters the middle 
cranial fossa, and descends through the foramen ovale to 
exit the cranial cavity carrying preganglionic parasympa­
thetic fibers to the otic ganglion (Table 8.6).
Vagus nerve [X]
The vagus nerve [X] carries GSA, GVA, SA, GVE, and 
BE fibers:
■	 The GSA fibers provide sensory input from the larynx, 
laryngopharynx, deeper parts of the auricle, part of the 
external acoustic meatus, and the dura mater in the 
posterior cranial fossa.
■	 The GVA fibers provide sensory input from the aortic 
body chemoreceptors and aortic arch baroreceptors, 
and the esophagus, bronchi, lungs, heart, and abdomi­
nal viscera in the foregut and midgut.
■	 The SA fibers are for taste around the epiglottis and 
pharynx.
■	 The GVE fibers are part of the parasympathetic part of 
the autonomic division of the PNS and stimulate smooth 
muscle and glands in the pharynx, larynx, thoracic 
viscera, and abdominal viscera of the foregut and 
midgut.
■	 The BE fibers innervate one muscle of the tongue (pala­
toglossus), the muscles of the soft palate (except the 
tensor veli palatini), pharynx (except the stylopharyn­
geus), and larynx.
The vagus nerve arises as a group of rootlets on the 
anterolateral surface of the medulla oblongata just inferior 
to the rootlets arising to form the glossopharyngeal nerve 
[IX] (Fig. 8.54). The rootlets cross the posterior cranial 
fossa and enter the jugular foramen (Fig. 8.53). Within 
this foramen, and before exiting from it, the rootlets 
merge to form the vagus nerve [X]. Within or immedi­
ately outside the jugular foramen are two ganglia, the 
superior (jugular) and inferior (nodose) ganglia, which 
contain the cell bodies of the sensory neurons in the vagus 
nerve [X].
Accessory nerve [XI]
The accessory nerve [XI] is a cranial nerve that carries BE 
fibers to innervate the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius 
muscles (see Diogo R et al. Nature 2015;520:466–473). 
It is a unique cranial nerve because its roots arise from 
motor neurons in the upper five segments of the cervical 
spinal cord. These fibers leave the lateral surface of the 
spinal cord and, joining together as they ascend, enter the 
cranial cavity through the foramen magnum (Fig. 8.54). 
The accessory nerve [XI] continues through the posterior 
cranial fossa and exits through the jugular foramen (Fig. 
8.53). It then descends in the neck to innervate the ster­
nocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles from their deep 
surfaces.
Cranial root of the accessory nerve
Some descriptions of the accessory nerve [XI] refer to a 
few rootlets arising from the caudal part of the medulla 
oblongata on the anterolateral surface just inferior to the 
rootlets arising to form the vagus nerve [X] as the “cranial” 
root of the accessory nerve (Fig. 8.54). Leaving the 
medulla, the cranial roots course with the “spinal” roots 
of the accessory nerve [XI] into the jugular foramen, at 
which point the cranial roots join the vagus nerve [X]. As 
part of the vagus nerve [X], they are distributed to the 
pharyngeal musculature innervated by the vagus nerve 
[X] and are therefore described as being part of the vagus 
nerve [X].
Hypoglossal nerve [XII]
The hypoglossal nerve [XII] carries GSE fibers to innervate 
all intrinsic muscles and most of the extrinsic muscles of 
the tongue. It arises as several rootlets from the anterior 
surface of the medulla (Fig. 8.54), passes laterally across 
the posterior cranial fossa, and exits through the hypoglos­
sal canal (Fig. 8.53). This nerve innervates the hyoglossus, 
styloglossus, and genioglossus muscles and all intrinsic 
muscles of the tongue.

=== PAGE 922 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Face
8
895
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Risorius
Fascia over masseter muscle
Skin at the corner of the 
mouth
Facial nerve [VII]
Retracts corner of mouth
Zygomaticus major
Posterior part of lateral surface 
of zygomatic bone
Skin at the corner of the 
mouth
Facial nerve [VII]
Draws the corner of the mouth 
upward and laterally
Zygomaticus minor
Anterior part of lateral surface of 
zygomatic bone
Upper lip just medial to 
corner of mouth
Facial nerve [VII]
Draws the upper lip upward
Levator labii superioris
Infra-orbital margin of maxilla
Skin of upper lateral half of 
upper lip
Facial nerve [VII]
Raises upper lip; helps form
nasolabial furrow
Levator labii
superioris alaeque nasi
Frontal process of maxilla
Alar cartilage of nose and 
upper lip
Facial nerve [VII]
Raises upper lip and opens 
nostril
Levator anguli oris
Maxilla below infra-orbital 
foramen
Skin at the corner of mouth
Facial nerve [VII]
Raises corner of mouth; helps 
form nasolabial furrow
Orbicularis oris
From muscles in area; maxilla 
and mandible in midline
Forms ellipse around mouth
Facial nerve [VII]
Closes lips; protrudes lips
Buccinator
Posterior parts of maxilla and 
mandible; pterygomandibular 
raphe
Blends with orbicularis oris 
and into lips
Facial nerve [VII]
Presses the cheek against teeth; 
compresses distended cheeks
OTHER MUSCLES OR 
GROUPS
Anterior auricular
Anterior part of temporal
fascia
Into helix of ear
Facial nerve [VII]
Draws ear upward and forward
Superior auricular
Epicranial aponeurosis on side of 
head
Upper part of auricle
Facial nerve [VII]
Elevates ear
Posterior auricular
Mastoid process of temporal 
bone
Convexity of concha of ear
Facial nerve [VII]
Draws ear upward and backward
Occipitofrontalis
—Frontal belly
Skin of eyebrows
Into galea aponeurotica
Facial nerve [VII]
Wrinkles forehead; raises 
eyebrows
—Occipital belly
Lateral part of superior nuchal 
line of occipital bone and 
mastoid process of temporal 
bone
Into galea aponeurotica
Facial nerve [VII]
Draws scalp backward
Table 8.7  Muscles of the face—cont’d
Orbicularis oculi
The orbicularis oculi is a large muscle that completely 
surrounds each orbital orifice and extends into each eyelid 
(Fig. 8.57). It closes the eyelids. It has two major parts:
■	 The outer orbital part is a broad ring that encircles the 
orbital orifice and extends outward beyond the orbital 
rim.
■	 The inner palpebral part is in the eyelids and consists 
of muscle fibers originating in the medial corner of the 
eye that arch across each lid to attach laterally.
The orbital and palpebral parts have specific roles to 
play during eyelid closure. The palpebral part closes the eye 
gently, whereas the orbital part closes the eye more force­
fully and produces some wrinkling on the forehead.
An additional small lacrimal part of the orbicularis 
oculi muscle is deep, medial in position, and attaches to 
bone posterior to the lacrimal sac of the lacrimal apparatus 
in the orbit.
Corrugator supercilii
The second muscle in the orbital group is the much smaller 
corrugator supercilii (Fig. 8.57), which is deep to the 
eyebrows and the orbicularis oculi muscle and is active 
when frowning. It arises from the medial end of the super­
ciliary arch, passing upward and laterally to insert into the 
skin of the medial half of the eyebrow. It draws the eye­
brows toward the midline, causing vertical wrinkles above 
the nose.

=== PAGE 925 ===
Head and Neck
898
The fibers of the buccinator pass toward the corner 
of the mouth to insert into the lips, blending with fibers 
from the orbicularis oris in a unique fashion. Central fibers 
of the buccinator cross so that lower fibers enter the upper 
lip and upper fibers enter the lower lip (Fig. 8.60). The 
highest and lowest fibers of the buccinator do not cross and 
enter the upper and lower lips, respectively.
Contraction of the buccinator presses the cheek against 
the teeth. This keeps the cheek taut and aids in mastication 
by preventing food from accumulating between the teeth 
and the cheek. The muscle also assists in the forceful expul­
sion of air from the cheeks.
Lower group of  oral muscles
The muscles in the lower group consist of the depressor 
anguli oris, depressor labii inferioris. and mentalis 
(Fig. 8.59).
■	 The depressor anguli oris is active during frowning. 
It arises along the side of the mandible below the 
canine, premolar, and first molar teeth and inserts 
into skin and the upper part of the orbicularis oris near 
the corner of the mouth. It depresses the corner of the 
mouth.
■	 The depressor labii inferioris arises from the front 
of the mandible, deep to the depressor anguli oris. Its 
fibers move superiorly and medially, some merging with 
fibers from the same muscle on the opposite side and 
fibers from the orbicularis oris before inserting into the 
lower lip. It depresses the lower lip and moves it 
laterally.
■	 The mentalis helps position the lip when drinking from 
a cup or when pouting. It is the deepest muscle of the 
lower group arising from the mandible just inferior to 
the incisor teeth, with its fibers passing downward 
and medially to insert into the skin of the chin. It raises 
and protrudes the lower lip as it wrinkles the skin of 
the chin.
Upper group of  oral muscles
The muscles of the upper group of oral muscles consist of 
the risorius, zygomaticus major, zygomaticus minor, levator 
labii superioris, levator labii superioris alaeque nasi, and 
levator anguli oris (Fig. 8.59).
■	 The risorius helps produce a grin (Fig. 8.59). It is a 
thin, superficial muscle that extends laterally from the 
corner of the mouth in a slightly upward direction. 
Contraction of its fibers pulls the corner of the mouth 
laterally and upward.
■	 The zygomaticus major and zygomaticus minor 
help produce a smile (Fig. 8.59). The zygomaticus major 
acting on the lips. It inserts into the skin and mucous 
membrane of the lips, and into itself.
Contraction of the orbicularis oris narrows the mouth 
and closes the lips.
Buccinator
The buccinator forms the muscular component of the 
cheek and is used every time air expanding the cheeks is 
forcefully expelled (Figs. 8.59 and 8.60). It is in the space 
between the mandible and the maxilla, deep to the other 
facial muscles in the area.
The buccinator arises from the posterior part of the 
maxilla and mandible opposite the molar teeth and the 
pterygomandibular raphe, which is a tendinous band 
between the pterygoid hamulus superiorly and the man­
dible inferiorly and is a point of attachment for the bucci­
nator and superior pharyngeal constrictor muscles.
Fig. 8.60  Buccinator muscle. 
Buccinator muscle
Parotid
duct (cut )
Pterygomandibular raphe
Superior pharyngeal
constrictor muscle

=== PAGE 927 ===
Head and Neck
900
sternocleidomastoid muscle and continue anteriorly to 
halfway across the masseter muscle.
The parotid duct leaves the anterior edge of the parotid 
gland midway between the zygomatic arch and the corner 
of the mouth (Fig. 8.62). It crosses the face in a transverse 
direction and, after crossing the medial border of the mas­
seter muscle, turns deeply into the buccal fat pad and 
pierces the buccinator muscle. It opens into the oral cavity 
near the second upper molar tooth.
Parotid gland
The parotid glands are the largest of the three pairs of 
main salivary glands in the head and numerous structures 
pass through them. They are anterior to and below the 
lower half of the ear, superficial, posterior, and deep to the 
ramus of the mandible (Fig. 8.62). They extend down to 
the lower border of the mandible and up to the zygomatic 
arch. Posteriorly they cover the anterior part of the 
Fig. 8.62  Parotid gland. A. Lateral view. B. Cross section. 
Superficial temporal artery and vein
Maxillary artery and vein
A
B
Posterior auricular artery
Facial nerve [VII]
Retromandibular vein
Retromandibular vein
Parotid gland
Parotid gland
External jugular vein
External carotid artery
External carotid artery
Masseter
Masseter muscle
Buccinator
Marginal mandibular branches
Cervical branches
Buccal branches
Parotid duct
Transverse facial artery and vein
Zygomatic branches
Temporal branches
Mandible
Medial pterygoid muscle
Facial nerve [VII]
Mastoid process
Styloid process

=== PAGE 932 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Face
8
905
Once in the parotid gland, the main stem of the facial 
nerve [VII] usually divides into upper (temporofacial) and 
lower (cervicofacial) branches. As these branches pass 
through the substance of the parotid gland they may 
branch further or take part in an anastomotic network (the 
parotid plexus).
Whatever types of interconnections occur, five terminal 
groups of branches of the facial nerve [VII]—the temporal, 
zygomatic, buccal, marginal mandibular, and cervical 
branches—emerge from the parotid gland (Fig. 8.66A).
Although there are variations in the pattern of distribu­
tion of the five terminal groups of branches, the basic 
pattern is as follows:
■	 Temporal branches exit from the superior border of the 
parotid gland to supply muscles in the area of the 
temple, forehead, and supra-orbital area.
■	 Zygomatic branches emerge from the anterosuperior 
border of the parotid gland to supply muscles in the 
infra-orbital area, the lateral nasal area, and the 
upper lip.
■	 Buccal branches emerge from the anterior border of the 
parotid gland to supply muscles in the cheek, the upper 
lip, and the corner of the mouth.
■	 Marginal mandibular branches emerge from the 
anteroinferior border of the parotid gland to supply 
muscles of the lower lip and chin.
■	 Cervical branches emerge from the inferior border of 
the parotid gland to supply the platysma.
Vessels
The arterial supply to the face is primarily from branches 
of the external carotid artery, though there is some limited 
supply from a branch of the internal carotid artery.
Similarly, most of the venous return is back to the 
internal jugular vein, though some important connections 
from the face result in venous return through a clinically 
relevant intracranial pathway involving the cavernous 
sinus.
Mandibular nerve [V3]
The mandibular nerve [V3] exits the skull through the 
foramen ovale. Branches (Fig. 8.65) innervating the face 
include:
■	 the auriculotemporal nerve, which enters the face 
just posterior to the temporomandibular joint, passes 
through the parotid gland, and ascends just anterior to 
the ear to supply the external acoustic meatus, the 
surface of the tympanic membrane (eardrum), and a 
large area of the temple;
■	 the buccal nerve, which is on the surface of the buc­
cinator muscle supplying the cheek; and
■	 the mental nerve, which exits the mandible through 
the mental foramen and immediately divides into mul­
tiple branches to supply the skin and mucous membrane 
of the lower lip and skin of the chin (Fig. 8.65).
Motor innervation
The muscles of the face, as well as those associated with 
the external ear and the scalp, are derived from the second 
pharyngeal arch. The cranial nerve associated with this 
arch is the facial nerve [VII] and therefore branches of the 
facial nerve [VII] innervate all these muscles.
The facial nerve [VII] exits the posterior cranial fossa 
through the internal acoustic meatus. It passes through 
the temporal bone, giving off several branches, and emerges 
from the base of the skull through the stylomastoid foramen 
(Fig. 8.66). At this point it gives off the posterior auricu­
lar nerve. This branch passes upward, behind the ear, to 
supply the occipital belly of the occipitofrontalis muscle of 
the scalp and the posterior auricular muscle of the ear.
The main stem of the facial nerve [VII] then gives off 
another branch, which innervates the posterior belly of the 
digastric muscle and the stylohyoid muscle. At this point, 
the facial nerve [VII] enters the deep surface of the parotid 
gland (Fig. 8.66B).

=== PAGE 933 ===
Head and Neck
906
Fig. 8.66  Facial nerve [VII] on the face. A. Terminal branches. B. Branches before entering the parotid gland. 
Parotid gland
Temporofacial branch
Cervicofacial branch
Posterior auricular nerve
Temporofacial branch
Facial nerve [VII]
Cervicofacial branch
Marginal mandibular branches
Cervical branches
Buccal branches
Zygomatic branches
Temporal branches
A
B
Posterior auricular nerve
External acoustic meatus
Mandible
Digastric branch
Digastric muscle
Mastoid process
Arteries
Facial artery
The facial artery is the major vessel supplying the face 
(Fig. 8.67). It branches from the anterior surface of the 
external carotid artery, passes up through the deep struc­
tures of the neck, and appears at the lower border of the 
mandible after passing posterior to the submandibular 
gland. Curving around the inferior border of the mandible 
just anterior to the masseter, where its pulse can be felt, the 
facial artery then enters the face. From this point the facial 
artery runs upward and medially in a tortuous course. It 
passes along the side of the nose and terminates as the 
angular artery at the medial corner of the eye.
Along its path the facial artery is deep to the platysma, 
risorius, and zygomaticus major and minor, superficial to 
the buccinator and levator anguli oris, and may pass 
superficially to or through the levator labii superioris.
Branches of the facial artery include the superior 
and inferior labial branches and the lateral nasal branch 
(Fig. 8.67).

=== PAGE 935 ===
Head and Neck
908
■	 The mental artery enters the face through the mental 
foramen and supplies the chin.
Branches of  the ophthalmic artery
Three small arteries from the internal carotid artery also 
contribute to the arterial supply of the face. These vessels 
arise from the ophthalmic artery, a branch of the inter­
nal carotid artery, after the ophthalmic artery enters 
the orbit:
■	 The zygomaticofacial and zygomaticotemporal 
arteries come from the lacrimal branch of the ophthal­
mic artery (Fig. 8.67), enter the face through the 
zygomaticofacial and zygomaticotemporal foramina, 
and supply the area of the face over the zygomatic 
bone.
■	 The dorsal nasal artery, a terminal branch of the 
ophthalmic artery, exits the orbit in the medial corner, 
and supplies the dorsum of the nose.
■	 The supraorbital and supratrochlear arteries 
supply the anterior scalp.
Veins
Facial vein
The facial vein is the major vein draining the face (Fig. 
8.67). Its point of origin is near the medial corner of the 
orbit as the supratrochlear and supra-orbital veins 
come together to form the angular vein. This vein becomes 
the facial vein as it proceeds inferiorly and assumes a posi­
tion just posterior to the facial artery. The facial vein 
descends across the face with the facial artery until it 
reaches the inferior border of the mandible. Here the artery 
and vein part company and the facial vein passes superficial 
to the submandibular gland to enter the internal jugular 
vein.
Throughout its course the facial vein receives tributar­
ies from veins draining the eyelids, external nose, lips, 
cheek, and chin that accompany the various branches of 
the facial artery.
The labial branches arise near the corner of the mouth:
■	 The inferior labial branch supplies the lower lip.
■	 The superior labial branch supplies the upper lip, and 
also provides a branch to the nasal septum.
Near the midline, the superior and inferior labial 
branches anastomose with their companion arteries from 
the opposite side of the face. This provides an important 
connection between the facial arteries and the external 
carotid arteries of opposite sides.
The lateral nasal branch is a small branch arising 
from the facial artery as it passes along the side of the nose. 
It supplies the lateral surface and dorsum of the nose.
Transverse facial artery
Another contributor to the vascular supply of the face is 
the transverse facial artery (Fig. 8.67), which is a branch 
of the superficial temporal artery (the smaller of the two 
terminal branches of the external carotid artery).
The transverse facial artery arises from the superficial 
temporal artery within the substance of the parotid gland, 
passes through the gland, and crosses the face in a trans­
verse direction. Lying on the superficial surface of the 
masseter muscle, it is between the zygomatic arch and the 
parotid duct.
Branches of  the maxillary artery
The maxillary artery, the larger of the two terminal 
branches of the external carotid artery, gives off several 
small branches which contribute to the arterial supply to 
the face:
■	 The infra-orbital artery enters the face through the 
infra-orbital foramen and supplies the lower eyelid, 
upper lip, and the area between these structures.
■	 The buccal artery enters the face on the superficial 
surface of the buccinator muscle and supplies structures 
in this area.

=== PAGE 936 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Face
8
909
Fig. 8.68  Intracranial venous connections. 
Cavernous sinus
Ophthalmic veins
Infra-orbital vein
Deep facial vein
Facial vein
Pterygoid plexus
of veins
Fig. 8.69  Lymphatic drainage of the face. 
Pre-auricular and parotid nodes
Submandibular nodes
Submental nodes
Transverse facial vein
The transverse facial vein is a small vein that accompanies 
the transverse facial artery in its journey across the face 
(Fig. 8.67). It empties into the superficial temporal vein 
within the substance of the parotid gland.
Intracranial venous connections
As it crosses the face, the facial vein has numerous connec­
tions with venous channels passing into deeper regions of 
the head (Fig. 8.68):
■	 near the medial corner of the orbit, it communicates 
with ophthalmic veins;
■	 in the area of the cheek it communicates with veins 
passing into the infra-orbital foramen;
■	 it also communicates with veins passing into deeper 
regions of the face (i.e., the deep facial vein connecting 
with the pterygoid plexus of veins).
All these venous channels have interconnections with 
the intracranial cavernous sinus through emissary veins 
that connect intracranial with extracranial veins. There 
are no valves in the facial vein or any other venous 
channels in the head, so blood can move in any direction. 
Because of the interconnections between the veins, infec­
tions of the face, primarily above the mouth (i.e., the 
“danger area”) should be handled with great care to 
prevent the dissemination of infectious material in an 
intracranial direction.
Lymphatic drainage
Lymphatic drainage from the face primarily moves toward 
three groups of lymph nodes (Fig. 8.69):
■	 submental nodes inferior and posterior to the chin, 
which drain lymphatics from the medial part of the 
lower lip and chin bilaterally;
■	 submandibular nodes superficial to the submandibu­
lar gland and inferior to the body of the mandible, which 
drain the lymphatics from the medial corner of the 
orbit, most of the external nose the medial part of the 
cheek, the upper lip, and the lateral part of the lower lip 
that follows the course of the facial artery;
■	 pre-auricular and parotid nodes anterior to the 
ear, which drain lymphatics from most of the eyelids, 
a part of the external nose, and the lateral part of 
the cheek.

=== PAGE 941 ===
Head and Neck
914
to the obliquus capitis inferior muscle, ascends superfi­
cial to the suboccipital triangle, pierces the semispinalis 
capitis and trapezius muscles, and then spreads out to 
supply a large part of the posterior scalp as far superiorly 
as the vertex.
■	 The third occipital nerve is a branch of the posterior 
ramus of the C3 spinal nerve, pierces the semispinalis 
capitis and trapezius muscles, and supplies a small area 
of the lower part of the scalp.
Vessels
Arteries
Arteries supplying the scalp (Fig. 8.74) are branches of 
either the external carotid artery or the ophthalmic artery, 
which is a branch of the internal carotid artery.
cord levels C2 and C3 (Fig. 8.73). These branches are the 
great auricular, the lesser occipital, the greater occipital, 
and the third occipital nerves:
■	 The great auricular nerve is a branch of the cervical 
plexus, arises from the anterior rami of the C2 and C3 
spinal nerves, ascends on the surface of the sternoclei­
domastoid muscle, and innervates a small area of the 
scalp just posterior to the ear.
■	 The lesser occipital nerve is also a branch of the 
cervical plexus, arises from the anterior ramus of the C2 
spinal nerve, ascends on the posterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle, and supplies an area of the 
scalp posterior and superior to the ear.
■	 The greater occipital nerve is a branch of the poste­
rior ramus of the C2 spinal nerve, emerges just inferior 
Fig. 8.74  Vasculature of the scalp. 
Occipital artery
Occipital vein
Posterior auricular artery
Posterior auricular vein
External jugular vein
Internal jugular vein
External carotid artery
Superficial temporal
artery and vein
Supratrochlear
artery and vein
Supra-orbital
artery and vein

=== PAGE 949 ===
Head and Neck
922
Innervation
The innervation of the lacrimal gland involves three differ­
ent components (Fig. 8.87).
Sensory innervation
Sensory neurons from the lacrimal gland return to the CNS 
through the lacrimal branch of the ophthalmic nerve [V1].
Secretomotor (parasympathetic) innervation
Secretomotor fibers from the parasympathetic part of the 
autonomic division of the PNS stimulate fluid secretion 
Fig. 8.86  Position of lacrimal sac. 
Medial palpebral ligament
Lacrimal part of orbicularis 
oculi muscle
Orbital septum
  Posterior lacrimal crest
Lacrimal sac
Anterior lacrimal crest
Periosteum
Anterior
Posterior
Lateral
from the lacrimal gland. These preganglionic parasympa­
thetic neurons leave the CNS in the facial nerve [VII], enter 
the greater petrosal nerve (a branch of the facial nerve 
[VII]), and continue with this nerve until it becomes the 
nerve of  the pterygoid canal (Fig. 8.87).
The nerve of the pterygoid canal eventually joins the 
pterygopalatine ganglion where the preganglionic para­
sympathetic neurons synapse on postganglionic parasym­
pathetic neurons. The postganglionic neurons join the 
maxillary nerve [V2] and continue with it until the zygo­
matic nerve branches from it, and travel with the zygomatic 
nerve until it gives off the zygomaticotemporal nerve, 
which eventually distributes postganglionic parasympa­
thetic fibers in a small branch that joins the lacrimal nerve. 
The lacrimal nerve passes to the lacrimal gland.
Sympathetic innervation
Sympathetic innervation of the lacrimal gland follows a 
similar path as parasympathetic innervation. Postgangli­
onic sympathetic fibers originating in the superior cervical 
ganglion travel along the plexus surrounding the internal 
carotid artery (Fig. 8.87). They leave this plexus as the deep 
petrosal nerve and join the parasympathetic fibers in the 
nerve of the pterygoid canal. Passing through the pterygo­
palatine ganglion, the sympathetic fibers from this point 
onward follow the same path as the parasympathetic fibers 
to the lacrimal gland.
Vessels
The arterial supply to the lacrimal gland is by branches 
from the ophthalmic artery and venous drainage is through 
the ophthalmic veins.
Fig. 8.87  Innervation of the lacrimal gland. 
Lacrimal nerve
Lacrimal gland
Foramen rotundum
Maxillary nerve [V2]
Pterygoid canal
Greater petrosal nerve
Deep petrosal nerve
Nerve of
pterygoid canal
Sympathetic plexus
Internal carotid artery
Branch of zygomaticotemporal nerve
Zygomatic nerve
Pterygopalatine ganglion
Sensory fibers
Sympathetic postganglionic fibers
Parasympathetic preganglionic fibers
Parasympathetic postganglionic fibers
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
Zygomaticofacial nerve

=== PAGE 958 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Orbit
8
931
Fig. 8.100  Venous drainage of the orbit and eyeball. 
Superior ophthalmic vein
Inferior
ophthalmic vein
Cavernous sinus
Pterygoid 
plexus
of veins
Infra-orbital vein
Angular vein
Inferior ophthalmic vein
Supra-orbital vein
Vessels
Arteries
The arterial supply to the structures in the orbit, including 
the eyeball, is by the ophthalmic artery (Fig. 8.99). This 
vessel is a branch of the internal carotid artery, given off 
immediately after the internal carotid artery leaves the 
cavernous sinus. The ophthalmic artery passes into the 
orbit through the optic canal with the optic nerve.
In the orbit the ophthalmic artery initially lies inferior 
and lateral to the optic nerve (Fig. 8.99). As it passes 
forward in the orbit, it crosses superior to the optic nerve 
and proceeds anteriorly on the medial side of the orbit.
In the orbit the ophthalmic artery gives off numerous 
branches as follows:
■	 the lacrimal artery, which arises from the ophthalmic 
artery on the lateral side of the optic nerve, and passes 
anteriorly on the lateral side of the orbit, supplying the 
lacrimal gland, muscles, the anterior ciliary branch to 
the eyeball, and the lateral sides of the eyelid;
■	 the central retinal artery, which enters the optic 
nerve, proceeds down the center of the nerve to the 
retina, and is clearly seen when viewing the retina with 
an ophthalmoscope—occlusion of this vessel or of the 
parent artery leads to blindness;
■	 the long and short posterior ciliary arteries, which 
are branches that enter the eyeball posteriorly, piercing 
the sclera, and supplying structures inside the eyeball;
Fig. 8.99  Arterial supply to the orbit and eyeball. 
Supra-orbital artery
Short posterior
ciliary artery
Lacrimal artery
Central retinal
artery
Ophthalmic artery
Optic nerve
Long posterior
ciliary artery
Posterior ethmoidal artery
Lateral
Anterior ethmoidal artery
Dorsal nasal artery
Supratrochlear artery
■	 the 
muscular 
arteries, 
which 
are 
branches 
supplying the intrinsic muscles of the eyeball;
■	 the supra-orbital artery, which usually arises 
from the ophthalmic artery immediately after it has 
crossed the optic nerve, proceeds anteriorly, and exits 
the orbit through the supra-orbital foramen with the 
supra-orbital nerve—it supplies the forehead and scalp 
as it passes across these areas to the vertex of the skull;
■	 the posterior ethmoidal artery, which exits the orbit 
through the posterior ethmoidal foramen to supply the 
ethmoidal cells and nasal cavity;
■	 the anterior ethmoidal artery, which exits the orbit 
through the anterior ethmoidal foramen, enters the 
cranial cavity giving off the anterior meningeal branch, 
and continues into the nasal cavity supplying the septum 
and lateral wall, and ending as the dorsal nasal artery;
■	 the medial palpebral arteries, which are small 
branches supplying the medial area of the upper and 
lower eyelids;
■	 the dorsal nasal artery, which is one of the two ter­
minal branches of the ophthalmic artery, leaves the 
orbit to supply the upper surface of the nose; and
■	 the supratrochlear artery, which is the other termi­
nal branch of the ophthalmic artery and leaves the orbit 
with the supratrochlear nerve, supplying the forehead 
as it passes across it in a superior direction.
Veins
There are two venous channels in the orbit, the superior 
and inferior ophthalmic veins (Fig. 8.100).

=== PAGE 959 ===
Head and Neck
932
The superior ophthalmic vein begins in the anterior 
area of the orbit as connecting veins from the supra-orbital 
vein and the angular vein join together. It passes across the 
superior part of the orbit, receiving tributaries from the 
companion veins to the branches of the ophthalmic artery 
and veins draining the posterior part of the eyeball. Poste­
riorly, it leaves the orbit through the superior orbital fissure 
and enters the cavernous sinus.
The inferior ophthalmic vein is smaller than the 
superior ophthalmic vein, begins anteriorly, and passes 
across the inferior part of the orbit. It receives various 
tributaries from muscles and the posterior part of the 
eyeball as it crosses the orbit.
The inferior ophthalmic vein leaves the orbit posteriorly 
by:
■	 joining with the superior ophthalmic vein,
■	 passing through the superior orbital fissure on its own 
to join the cavernous sinus, or
■	 passing through the inferior orbital fissure to join with 
the pterygoid plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa.
Because the ophthalmic veins communicate with the 
cavernous sinus, they act as a route by which infections 
can spread from outside to inside the cranial cavity.
Innervation
Numerous nerves pass into the orbit and innervate struc­
tures within its bony walls. They include the optic nerve 
[II], the oculomotor nerve [III], the trochlear nerve [IV], 
the abducent nerve [VI], and autonomic nerves. Other 
nerves such as the ophthalmic nerve [V1] innervate orbital 
structures and then travel out of the orbit to innervate 
other regions.
Optic nerve
The optic nerve [II] is not a true cranial nerve, but rather 
an extension of the brain carrying afferent fibers from the 
retina of the eyeball to the visual centers of the brain. The 
optic nerve is surrounded by the cranial meninges, includ­
ing the subarachnoid space, which extends as far forward 
as the eyeball.
Any increase in intracranial pressure therefore results 
in increased pressure in the subarachnoid space surround­
ing the optic nerve. This may impede venous return along 
the retinal veins, causing edema of the optic disc (papille­
dema), which can be seen when the retina is examined 
using an ophthalmoscope.
The optic nerve leaves the orbit through the optic canal 
(Fig. 8.101). It is accompanied in the optic canal by the 
ophthalmic artery.
Oculomotor nerve
The oculomotor nerve [III] leaves the anterior surface of 
the brainstem between the midbrain and the pons. It passes 
forward in the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus.
Just before entering the orbit the oculomotor nerve 
[III] divides into superior and inferior branches (Fig. 
8.102). These branches enter the orbit through the supe­
rior orbital fissure, lying within the common tendinous 
ring (Fig. 8.101).
Inside the orbit the small superior branch passes upward 
over the lateral side of the optic nerve to innervate the 
superior rectus and levator palpebrae superioris muscles 
(Fig. 8.102).
Fig. 8.101  Innervation of the orbit and eyeball. 
Lacrimal branch of ophthalmic nerve [V1]
Nasociliary branch
of ophthalmic nerve [V1]
Frontal branch of ophthalmic nerve [V1]
Optic nerve
Optic canal
Inferior ophthalmic vein
Superior ophthalmic vein
Ophthalmic artery
Inferior branch of 
oculomotor nerve [III]
Superior branch of 
oculomotor nerve [III]
Abducent nerve [VI]
Trochlear nerve [IV]
Common tendinous ring
Lateral
Medial
Fig. 8.102  Oculomotor nerve [III] and its divisions. 
Levator palpebrae superioris
Superior rectus
Medial rectus
Ciliary ganglion
Inferior oblique
Inferior rectus
Inferior branch
Oculomotor nerve [III]
Superior branch

=== PAGE 977 ===
Head and Neck
950
■	 a bony part (the one-third nearest the middle ear); and
■	 a cartilaginous part (the remaining two-thirds).
The opening of the bony part is clearly visible on the 
inferior surface of the skull at the junction of the squamous 
and petrous parts of the temporal bone immediately poste­
rior to the foramen ovale and foramen spinosum.
Vessels
The arterial supply to the pharyngotympanic tube is from 
several sources. Branches arise from the ascending pha­
ryngeal artery (a branch of the external carotid artery) 
and from two branches of the maxillary artery (the middle 
meningeal artery and the artery of the pterygoid canal).
Venous drainage of the pharyngotympanic tube is to 
the pterygoid plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa.
Innervation
Innervation of the mucous membrane lining the pharyn­
gotympanic tube is primarily from the tympanic plexus 
because it is continuous with the mucous membrane lining 
the tympanic cavity, the internal surface of the tympanic 
membrane, and the mastoid antrum and mastoid cells. 
This plexus receives its major contribution from the tym­
panic nerve, a branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve [IX].
■	 The round window is posteroinferior to the 
promontory.
■	 Posterior and superior to the oval window on the medial 
wall is the prominence of  the facial canal, which is 
a ridge of bone produced by the facial nerve [VII] in its 
canal as it passes through the temporal bone.
■	 Just above and posterior to the prominence of the facial 
canal is a broader ridge of bone (prominence of  the 
lateral semicircular canal) produced by the lateral 
semicircular canal, which is a structure involved in 
detecting motion.
Mastoid area
Posterior to the epitympanic recess of the middle ear is the 
aditus to the mastoid antrum, which is the opening to the 
mastoid antrum (Fig. 8.121).
The mastoid antrum is a cavity continuous with col­
lections of air-filled spaces (the mastoid cells), throughout 
the mastoid part of the temporal bone, including the 
mastoid process. The mastoid antrum is separated from the 
middle cranial fossa above by only the thin tegmen tympani.
The mucous membrane lining the mastoid air cells is 
continuous with the mucous membrane throughout the 
middle ear. Therefore infections in the middle ear can easily 
spread into the mastoid area.
In the clinic
Mastoiditis
Infection within the mastoid antrum and mastoid cells is 
usually secondary to infection in the middle ear. The 
mastoid cells provide an excellent culture medium for 
infection. Infection of the bone (osteomyelitis) may also 
develop, spreading into the middle cranial fossa.
Drainage of the pus within the mastoid air cells is 
necessary and there are numerous approaches for doing 
this. When undertaking this type of surgery, it is 
extremely important that care is taken not to damage 
the mastoid wall of the middle ear to prevent injury to the 
facial nerve [VII]. Any breach of the inner table of the 
cranial vault may allow bacteria to enter the cranial cavity 
and meningitis will ensue.
Fig. 8.122  Pharyngotympanic tube. 
Cartilage
Tympanic membrane
External acoustic meatus
Middle ear
Stapes
Incus
Malleus
Internal ear
Nasopharynx
Pharyngotympanic tube
Pharyngotympanic tube
The pharyngotympanic tube connects the middle ear with 
the nasopharynx (Fig. 8.122) and equalizes pressure on 
both sides of the tympanic membrane. Its opening in 
the middle ear is on the anterior wall, and from here it 
extends forward, medially, and downward to enter the 
nasopharynx just posterior to the inferior meatus of the 
nasal cavity. It consists of:

=== PAGE 979 ===
Head and Neck
952
Innervation of the tensor tympani is by a branch from 
the mandibular nerve [V3].
Contraction of the tensor tympani pulls the handle of 
the malleus medially. This tenses the tympanic membrane, 
reducing the force of vibrations in response to loud noises.
Stapedius
The stapedius muscle is a very small muscle that originates 
from inside the pyramidal eminence, which is a small 
projection on the mastoid wall of the middle ear (Fig. 
8.124). Its tendon emerges from the apex of the pyramidal 
eminence and passes forward to attach to the posterior 
surface of the neck of the stapes.
The stapedius is innervated by a branch from the facial 
nerve [VII].
Contraction of the stapedius muscle, usually in response 
to loud noises, pulls the stapes posteriorly and prevents 
excessive oscillation.
Vessels
Numerous arteries supply the structures in the middle ear:
■	 the two largest branches are the tympanic branch of 
the maxillary artery and the mastoid branch of the 
occipital or posterior auricular arteries;
■	 smaller branches come from the middle meningeal 
artery, the ascending pharyngeal artery, the artery of 
the pterygoid canal, and tympanic branches from the 
internal carotid artery.
Venous drainage of the middle ear returns to the ptery­
goid plexus of veins and the superior petrosal sinus.
Innervation
The tympanic plexus innervates the mucous membrane 
lining the walls and contents of the middle ear, which 
includes the mastoid area and the pharyngotympanic 
tube. It is formed by the tympanic nerve, a branch of 
the glossopharyngeal nerve [IX], and from branches of the 
internal carotid plexus. The tympanic plexus occurs in the 
Incus
The second bone in the series of auditory ossicles is the 
incus. It consists of the body of  the incus and long and 
short limbs (Fig. 8.123):
■	 The enlarged body of the incus articulates with the 
head of the malleus and is in the epitympanic recess.
■	 The long limb extends downward from the body, paral­
leling the handle of the malleus, and ends by bending 
medially to articulate with the stapes.
■	 The short limb extends posteriorly and is attached by a 
ligament to the upper posterior wall of the middle ear.
Stapes
The stapes is the most medial bone in the osseous chain 
and is attached to the oval window. It consists of the head 
of  the stapes, anterior and posterior limbs, and the 
base of  the stapes (Fig. 8.123):
■	 The head of the stapes is directed laterally and articu­
lates with the long process of the incus.
■	 The two limbs separate from each other and attach to 
the oval base.
■	 The base of the stapes fits into the oval window on the 
labyrinthine wall of the middle ear.
Muscles associated with the ossicles
Two muscles are associated with the bony ossicles of the 
middle ear—the tensor tympani and stapedius (Fig. 8.124 
and Table 8.10).
Tensor tympani
The tensor tympani muscle lies in a bony canal above the 
pharyngotympanic tube. It originates from the cartilagi­
nous part of the pharyngotympanic tube, the greater wing 
of the sphenoid, and its own bony canal, and passes 
through its canal in a posterior direction, ending in a 
rounded tendon that inserts into the upper part of the 
handle of the malleus.
Table 8.10  Muscles of the middle ear
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Tensor tympani
Cartilaginous part of 
pharyngotympanic tube, 
greater wing of sphenoid, its 
own bony canal
Upper part of handle of 
malleus
Branch from mandibular 
nerve [V3]
Contraction pulls handle of 
malleus medially, tensing 
tympanic membrane
Stapedius
Attached to inside of 
pyramidal eminence
Neck of stapes
Branch of facial nerve [VII]
Contraction pulls stapes 
posteriorly, preventing excessive 
oscillation

=== PAGE 988 ===
8
961
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
mandible. Structures that travel between the cranial cavity, 
neck, pterygopalatine fossa, floor of the oral cavity, floor of 
the orbit, temporal fossa, and superficial regions of the 
head pass through it.
Of the four muscles of mastication (masseter, tempora­
lis, medial pterygoid, and lateral pterygoid) that move the 
lower jaw at the temporomandibular joint, one (masseter) 
is lateral to the infratemporal fossa, two (medial and lateral 
pterygoid) are in the infratemporal fossa, and one fills the 
temporal fossa.
TEMPORAL AND INFRATEMPORAL FOSSAE
The temporal and infratemporal fossae are interconnected 
spaces on the lateral side of the head (Fig. 8.135). Their 
boundaries are formed by bone and soft tissues.
The temporal fossa is superior to the infratemporal 
fossa, above the zygomatic arch, and communicates with 
the infratemporal fossa below through the gap between the 
zygomatic arch and the more medial surface of the skull.
The infratemporal fossa is a wedge-shaped space deep 
to the masseter muscle and the underlying ramus of the 
Fig. 8.135  Temporal and infratemporal fossae. 
Zygomatic arch
Articular tubercle
Mandibular fossa
Groove for middle
temporal artery
Ramus of mandible
External acoustic
meatus
Supramastoid crest
Temporal fossa
Infratemporal fossa
Masseter muscle

=== PAGE 989 ===
Head and Neck
962
■	 a transversely oriented supramastoid crest, which 
extends posteriorly from the base of the zygomatic 
process and marks the posteroinferior border of the 
temporal fossa; and
■	 a vertically oriented groove for the middle temporal 
artery, a branch of the superficial temporal artery.
Two features that participate in forming the temporo­
mandibular joint on the inferior aspect of the root of the 
zygomatic process are the articular tubercle and the man­
dibular fossa. Both are elongate from medial to lateral. 
Posterior to the mandibular fossa is the external acoustic 
meatus. The tympanic part of the temporal bone is a flat 
concave plate of bone that curves inferiorly from the back 
of the mandibular fossa and forms part of the wall of the 
external auditory meatus.
When viewed from inferiorly, there is a distinct 
tympanosquamous fissure between the tympanic and 
Bony framework
Bones that contribute significantly to the boundaries of the 
temporal and infratemporal fossae include the temporal, 
zygomatic, and sphenoid bones, and the maxilla and man­
dible (Figs. 8.136 and 8.137).
Parts of the frontal and parietal bones are also involved.
Temporal bone
The squamous part of the temporal bone forms part of the 
bony framework of the temporal and infratemporal fossae.
The tympanic part of the temporal bone forms the 
posteromedial corner of the roof of the infratemporal 
fossa, and also articulates with the head of the mandible 
to form the temporomandibular joint.
The lateral surface of the squamous part of the temporal 
bone is marked by two surface features on the medial wall 
of the temporal fossa:
Fig. 8.136  Bony features related to the temporal and infratemporal fossae. 
Greater wing
of sphenoid bone
Frontal bone
Frontal process of
zygomatic bone
Zygomaticofacial
foramen
Zygomaticotemporal
foramen
(on deep surface of
zygomatic bone)
Posterior surface
of maxilla
Zygomatic bone
Maxillary process of
zygomatic bone
Lateral plate of pterygoid
process of sphenoid bone
Palatine bone
Pterygopalatine
fossa
Tympanomastoid
ﬁssure
Mastoid process
Tympanic plate
Spine of sphenoid
Styloid process
Pterygomaxillary ﬁssure
(leading into pterygopalatine fossa)
Pterygoid
hamulus
External acoustic
meatus
Supramastoid crest
Groove for middle
temporal artery
Mandibular fossa
Articular tubercle
Foramen spinosum
Infratemporal crest
Foramen ovale
Infratemporal
surface of maxilla
Alveolar foramen
Petrotympanic ﬁssure
Squamous part of
temporal bone

=== PAGE 990 ===
8
963
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
and curve superiorly. The inferior and lateral surfaces form 
the roof of the infratemporal fossa and the medial wall of 
the temporal fossa, respectively.
The sharply angled boundary between the lateral and 
inferior surfaces of the greater wing is the infratemporal 
crest (Fig. 8.136). Two apertures (the foramen ovale 
and the foramen spinosum) pass through the base of the 
greater wing and allow the mandibular nerve [V3] and 
the middle meningeal artery, respectively, to pass between 
the middle cranial fossa and infratemporal fossa. In addi­
tion, one or more small sphenoidal emissary foramina 
penetrate the base of the greater wing anteromedial to the 
foramen ovale and allow emissary veins to pass between 
the pterygoid plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa and 
the cavernous sinus in the middle cranial fossa.
Projecting vertically downward from the greater 
wing immediately medial to the foramen spinosum is the 
irregularly shaped spine of  the sphenoid, which is the 
attachment site for the cranial end of the sphenomandibu­
lar ligament.
The lateral plate of the pterygoid process is a vertically 
oriented sheet of bone that projects posterolaterally from 
the pterygoid process (Fig. 8.136). Its lateral and medial 
surfaces provide attachment for the lateral and medial 
pterygoid muscles, respectively.
Maxilla
The posterior surface of the maxilla contributes to the 
anterior wall of the infratemporal fossa (Fig. 8.136). This 
surface is marked by a foramen for the posterosuperior 
alveolar nerve and vessels. The superior margin forms the 
inferior border of the inferior orbital fissure.
Zygomatic bone
The zygomatic bone is a quadrangular-shaped bone that 
forms the palpable bony prominence of the cheek:
■	 A maxillary process extends anteromedially to articu­
late with the zygomatic process of the maxilla.
■	 A frontal process extends superiorly to articulate with 
the zygomatic process of the frontal bone.
■	 A temporal process extends posteriorly to articulate 
with the zygomatic process of the temporal bone to 
complete the zygomatic arch.
A small zygomaticofacial foramen on the lateral surface 
of the zygomatic bone transmits the zygomaticofacial 
nerve and vessels onto the cheek.
A thin plate of bone extends posteromedially from the 
frontal process and contributes to the lateral wall of the 
orbit on one side and the anterior wall of the temporal 
fossa on the other. A zygomaticotemporal foramen on the 
squamous parts of the temporal bone. Medially, a small slip 
of bone from the petrous part of the temporal bone insinu­
ates itself into the fissure and forms a petrotympanic 
fissure between it and the tympanic part (Fig. 8.136).
The chorda tympani nerve exits the skull and enters the 
infratemporal fossa through the medial end of the petro­
tympanic fissure.
Sphenoid bone
The parts of the sphenoid bone that form part of the bony 
framework of the infratemporal fossa are the lateral plate 
of the pterygoid process and the greater wing (Fig. 8.136). 
The greater wing also forms part of the medial wall of the 
temporal fossa.
The greater wings extend one on each side from the 
body of the sphenoid. They project laterally from the body 
Fig. 8.137  Mandible. A. Lateral view of left side. B. Medial view of 
left side. 
A
B
Superior border
Condylar process
Ramus
Angle
Inferior border
Body
Oblique line
Anterior border
Coronoid process
Mandibular notch
Lingula
Mandibular foramen
Mental foramen
Mylohyoid groove
Mylohyoid line
Roughening for attachment
of medial pterygoid muscle 
Angle
Pterygoid fovea
Head
Neck

=== PAGE 991 ===
Head and Neck
964
The medial surface of the ramus of the mandible is the 
lateral wall of the infratemporal fossa (Fig. 8.137B). Its 
most distinctive feature is the mandibular foramen, 
which is the superior opening of the mandibular canal. 
The inferior alveolar nerve and vessels pass through this 
foramen.
Immediately 
anterosuperior 
to 
the 
mandibular 
foramen is a triangular elevation (the lingula) for attach­
ment of the mandibular end of the sphenomandibular 
ligament.
An elongate groove (the mylohyoid groove) extends 
anteroinferiorly from the mandibular foramen. The nerve 
to the mylohyoid is in this groove.
Posteroinferior to the mylohyoid groove and mandibular 
foramen, the medial surface of the ramus of the mandible 
is roughened for attachment of the medial pterygoid 
muscle.
Temporomandibular joints
The temporomandibular joints, one on each side, allow 
opening and closing of the mouth and complex chewing 
or side-to-side movements of the lower jaw.
Each joint is synovial and is formed between the head of 
the mandible and the articular fossa and articular tubercle 
of the temporal bone (Fig. 8.138A).
Unlike most other synovial joints where the articular 
surfaces of the bones are covered by a layer of hyaline 
cartilage, those of the temporomandibular joint are covered 
temporal fossa surface of the plate where it attaches to the 
frontal process is for the zygomaticotemporal nerve.
Ramus of mandible
The ramus of  the mandible is quadrangular in shape 
and has medial and lateral surfaces and condylar and coro­
noid processes (Fig. 8.137).
The lateral surface of the ramus of the mandible is 
generally smooth except for the presence of a few obliquely 
oriented ridges. Most of the lateral surface provides attach­
ment for the masseter muscle.
The posterior and inferior borders of the ramus intersect 
to form the angle of  the mandible, while the superior 
border is notched to form the mandibular notch. The 
anterior border is sharp and is continuous below with the 
oblique line on the body of the mandible.
The coronoid process extends superiorly from the 
junction of the anterior and superior borders of the ramus. 
It is a flat, triangular process that provides attachment for 
the temporalis muscle.
The condylar process extends superiorly from the 
posterior and superior borders of the ramus. It consists of:
■	 the head of  the mandible, which is expanded medi­
ally and participates in forming the temporomandibular 
joint; and
■	 the neck of  the mandible, which bears a shallow 
depression (the pterygoid fovea) on its anterior surface 
for attachment of the lateral pterygoid muscle.
Fig. 8.138  Temporomandibular joint. A. Mouth closed. B. Mouth open. 
A
B
Upper joint cavity
Articular disc
Articular tubercle
Fibrocartilage on
articular surface
Capsule
Lower joint cavity
Synovial
membrane
Mandibular fossa
Forward movement of disc
and mandible at upper joint
Lateral pterygoid
muscle
Protrusion
Depression
Hinge movement
at lower joint

=== PAGE 992 ===
8
965
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
Movements of the mandible
A chewing or grinding motion occurs when the movements 
at the temporomandibular joint on one side are coordinated 
with a reciprocal set of movements at the joint on the other 
side. Movements of the mandible include depression, eleva­
tion, protrusion, and retraction (Fig. 8.140):
by fibrocartilage. In addition, the joint is completely divided 
by a fibrous articular disc into two parts:
■	 The lower part of the joint allows mainly the hinge-like 
depression and elevation of the mandible.
■	 The upper part of the joint allows the head of the man­
dible to translocate forward (protrusion) onto the articu­
lar tubercle and backward (retraction) into the 
mandibular fossa.
Opening the mouth involves both depression and pro­
trusion (Fig. 8.138B).
The forward or protrusive movement allows greater 
depression of the mandible by preventing backward 
movement of the angle of the mandible into structures in 
the neck.
Joint capsule
The synovial membrane of the joint capsule lines all 
nonarticular surfaces of the upper and lower compart­
ments of the joint and is attached to the margins of the 
articular disc.
The fibrous membrane of the joint capsule encloses 
the temporomandibular joint complex and is attached:
■	 above along the anterior margin of the articular 
tubercle,
■	 laterally and medially along the margins of the articular 
fossa,
■	 posteriorly to the region of the tympanosquamous 
suture, and
■	 below around the upper part of the neck of the 
mandible.
The articular disc attaches around its periphery to the 
inner aspect of the fibrous membrane.
Extracapsular ligaments
Three extracapsular ligaments are associated with the 
temporomandibular joint—the lateral, sphenomandibular, 
and the stylomandibular ligaments (Fig. 8.139):
■	 The lateral ligament is closest to the joint, just lateral 
to the capsule, and runs diagonally backward from the 
margin of the articular tubercle to the neck of the 
mandible.
■	 The sphenomandibular ligament is medial to the 
temporomandibular joint, runs from the spine of the 
sphenoid bone at the base of the skull to the lingula on 
the medial side of the ramus of the mandible.
■	 The stylomandibular ligament passes from the 
styloid process of the temporal bone to the posterior 
margin and angle of the mandible.
Fig. 8.139  Ligaments associated with the temporomandibular 
joint. 
Lateral ligament
Sphenomandibular ligament
Stylomandibular ligament
Capsule
Fig. 8.140  Movements of the temporomandibular joint. 
Protrusion
• Lateral pterygoid assisted
  by medial pterygoid
Retraction
• Posterior fibers of temporalis,
  deep part of masseter, and
  geniohyoid and digastric
Depression
• Gravity
• Digastric, geniohyoid, and
  mylohyoid muscles
Elevation
• Temporalis, masseter,
  medial pterygoid

=== PAGE 993 ===
Head and Neck
966
Fig. 8.141  Masseter muscle. 
Deep part
Superficial part
Masseteric nerve
Masseteric artery
Mandibular notch
Table 8.11  Muscles of mastication
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Masseter
Zygomatic arch and maxillary 
process of the zygomatic 
bone
Lateral surface of ramus of 
mandible
Masseteric nerve from the 
anterior trunk of the 
mandibular nerve [V3]
Elevation of mandible
Temporalis
Bone of temporal fossa and 
temporal fascia
Coronoid process of mandible 
and anterior margin of ramus of 
mandible almost to last molar 
tooth
Deep temporal nerves from 
the anterior trunk of the 
mandibular nerve [V3]
Elevation and retraction of 
mandible
Medial pterygoid
Deep head—medial surface 
of lateral plate of pterygoid 
process and pyramidal 
process of palatine bone; 
superficial head—tuberosity 
of the maxilla and pyramidal 
process of palatine bone
Medial surface of mandible near 
angle
Nerve to medial pterygoid 
from the mandibular nerve 
[V3]
Elevation and side-to-side 
movements of the mandible
Lateral pterygoid
Upper head—roof of 
infratemporal fossa; lower 
head—lateral surface of 
lateral plate of the pterygoid 
process
Capsule of temporomandibular 
joint in the region of attachment 
to the articular disc and to the 
pterygoid fovea on the neck of 
mandible
Nerve to lateral pterygoid 
directly from the anterior 
trunk of the mandibular 
nerve [V3] or from the buccal 
branch
Protrusion and side-to-side 
movements of the mandible
■	 Depression is generated by the digastric, geniohyoid, and 
mylohyoid muscles on both sides, is normally assisted by 
gravity, and, because it involves forward movement of 
the head of the mandible onto the articular tubercle, the 
lateral pterygoid muscles are also involved.
■	 Elevation is a very powerful movement generated by the 
temporalis, masseter, and medial pterygoid muscles and 
also involves movement of the head of the mandible 
into the mandibular fossa.
■	 Protraction is mainly achieved by the lateral pterygoid 
muscle, with some assistance by the medial pterygoid.
■	 Retraction is carried out by the geniohyoid and digastric 
muscles, and by the posterior and deep fibers of the 
temporalis and masseter muscles, respectively.
Except for the geniohyoid muscle, which is innervated 
by the C1 spinal nerve, all muscles that move the temporo­
mandibular joints are innervated by the mandibular nerve 
[V3] by branches that originate in the infratemporal fossa.
Masseter muscle
The masseter muscle is a powerful muscle of mastication 
that elevates the mandible (Fig. 8.141 and Table 8.11). It 
overlies the lateral surface of the ramus of the mandible.

=== PAGE 994 ===
8
967
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
Temporal fossa
The temporal fossa is a narrow fan-shaped space that 
covers the lateral surface of the skull (Fig. 8.142A):
■	 Its upper margin is defined by a pair of temporal lines 
that arch across the skull from the zygomatic process of 
the frontal bone to the supramastoid crest of the tempo­
ral bone.
■	 It is limited laterally by the temporal fascia, which is 
a tough, fan-shaped aponeurosis overlying the tempo­
ralis muscle and attached by its outer margin to the 
superior temporal line and by its inferior margin to the 
zygomatic arch.
■	 Anteriorly, it is limited by the posterior surface of the 
frontal process of the zygomatic bone and the posterior 
surface of the zygomatic process of the frontal bone, 
which separate the temporal fossa behind from the orbit 
in front.
The masseter muscle is quadrangular in shape and is 
anchored above to the zygomatic arch and below to most 
of the lateral surface of the ramus of the mandible.
The more superficial part of the masseter originates 
from the maxillary process of the zygomatic bone and the 
anterior two-thirds of the zygomatic process of the maxilla. 
It inserts into the angle of the mandible and related poste­
rior part of the lateral surface of the ramus of the 
mandible.
The deep part of the masseter originates from the 
medial aspect of the zygomatic arch and the posterior part 
of its inferior margin and inserts into the central and upper 
part of the ramus of the mandible as high as the coronoid 
process.
The masseter is innervated by the masseteric nerve from 
the mandibular nerve [V3] and supplied with blood by the 
masseteric artery from the maxillary artery.
The masseteric nerve and artery originate in the infra­
temporal fossa and pass laterally over the margin of the 
mandibular notch to enter the deep surface of the masseter 
muscle.
Fig. 8.142  Temporal fossa. A. Lateral view. B. Lateral view showing the infratemporal fossa. 
A
Inferior temporal line
Superior temporal line
Temporal fascia
Frontal process
of zygomatic bone
Zygomatic process
of frontal bone
Zygomatic arch
Supramastoid crest
of temporal bone
B
Temporal fossa
Infratemporal crest
of sphenoid
Infratemporal
fossa

=== PAGE 995 ===
Head and Neck
968
from the bony surfaces of the fossa superiorly to the inferior 
temporal line and is attached laterally to the surface of the 
temporal fascia. The more anterior fibers are oriented verti­
cally while the more posterior fibers are oriented horizon­
tally. The fibers converge inferiorly to form a tendon, which 
passes between the zygomatic arch and the infratemporal 
crest of the greater wing of the sphenoid to insert on the 
coronoid process of the mandible.
The temporalis muscle attaches down the anterior 
surface of the coronoid process and along the related 
margin of the ramus of the mandible, almost to the last 
molar tooth.
The temporalis is a powerful elevator of the mandible. 
Because this movement involves posterior translocation 
of the head of the mandible from the articular tubercle of 
the temporal bone and back into the mandibular fossa, the 
temporalis also retracts the mandible or pulls it posteriorly. 
In addition, the temporalis participates in side-to-side 
movements of the mandible.
■	 Its inferior margin is marked by the zygomatic arch 
laterally and by the infratemporal crest of the greater 
wing of the sphenoid medially (Fig. 8.142B)—between 
these two features, the floor of the temporal fossa is open 
medially to the infratemporal fossa and laterally to the 
region containing the masseter muscle.
Contents
The major structure in the temporal fossa is the temporalis 
muscle.
Also passing through the fossa is the zygomaticotempo­
ral branch of the maxillary nerve [V2], which enters the 
region through the zygomaticotemporal foramen on the 
temporal fossa surface of the zygomatic bone.
Temporalis muscle
The temporalis muscle is a large, fan-shaped muscle that 
fills much of the temporal fossa (Fig. 8.143). It originates 
Fig. 8.143  Temporalis muscle. Lateral view. 
Cut temporal fascia
Superior temporal line
Inferior temporal line
Coronoid process
Temporalis muscle

=== PAGE 996 ===
8
969
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
The zygomaticotemporal nerve enters the temporal 
fossa through one or more small foramina on the temporal 
fossa surface of the zygomatic bone.
Branches of the zygomaticotemporal nerve pass superi­
orly between the bone and the temporalis muscle to pene­
trate the temporal fascia and supply the skin of the temple 
(Fig. 8.144).
Deep temporal arteries
Normally two in number, these vessels originate from the 
maxillary artery in the infratemporal fossa and travel with 
the deep temporal nerves around the infratemporal crest 
of the greater wing of the sphenoid to supply the temporalis 
muscle (Fig. 8.144). They anastomose with branches of 
the middle temporal artery.
Middle temporal artery
The middle temporal artery originates from the superficial 
temporal artery just superior to the root of the zygomatic 
arch between this structure and the external ear (Fig. 
8.144). It penetrates the temporalis fascia, passes under 
The temporalis is innervated by deep temporal nerves 
that originate from the mandibular nerve [V3] in the infra­
temporal fossa and then pass into the temporal fossa.
Blood supply of the temporalis is by deep temporal arter­
ies, which travel with the nerves, and the middle temporal 
artery, which penetrates the temporal fascia at the posterior 
end of the zygomatic arch.
Deep temporal nerves
The deep temporal nerves, usually two in number, originate 
from the anterior trunk of the mandibular nerve [V3] in the 
infratemporal fossa (Fig. 8.144). They pass superiorly and 
around the infratemporal crest of the greater wing of the 
sphenoid to enter the temporal fossa deep to the temporalis 
muscle, and supply the temporalis muscle.
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
The zygomaticotemporal nerve is a branch of the zygomatic 
nerve (see Fig. 8.87, p. 922). The zygomatic nerve is a 
branch of the maxillary nerve [V2], which originates in the 
pterygopalatine fossa and passes into the orbit.
Fig. 8.144  Nerves and arteries of the temporal fossa. 
Temporal fascia
Zygomaticotemporal nerve
(branch of maxillary nerve [V2])
Deep temporal arteries
Mandibular nerve [V3]
Deep temporal nerves
Zygomaticofacial nerve
Infratemporal crest
Maxillary artery in infratemporal fossa
External carotid artery
Superficial temporal artery
Middle temporal artery
Temporalis muscle

=== PAGE 997 ===
Head and Neck
970
■	 The medial wall is formed anteriorly by the lateral 
plate of the pterygoid process and more posteriorly by 
the pharynx and by two muscles of the soft palate 
(tensor and levator veli palatini muscles), and contains 
the pterygomaxillary fissure anteriorly, which allows 
structures to pass between the infratemporal and ptery­
gopalatine fossae.
■	 The anterior wall is formed by part of the posterior 
surface of the maxilla and contains the alveolar 
foramen, and the upper part opens as the inferior orbital 
fissure into the orbit.
Contents
Major contents of the infratemporal fossa include the 
sphenomandibular ligament, medial and lateral pterygoid 
muscles (Table 8.11), the maxillary artery, the mandibular 
nerve [V3], branches of the facial nerve [VII] and the glos­
sopharyngeal nerve [IX], and the pterygoid plexus of veins.
Sphenomandibular ligament
The sphenomandibular ligament is an extracapsular 
ligament of the temporomandibular joint. It is attached 
the margin of the temporalis muscle, and travels superiorly 
on the deep surface of the temporalis muscle.
The middle temporal artery supplies the temporalis 
and anastomoses with branches of the deep temporal 
arteries.
Infratemporal fossa
The wedge-shaped infratemporal fossa is inferior to the 
temporal fossa and between the ramus of the mandible 
laterally and the wall of the pharynx medially. It has a roof, 
a lateral wall, and a medial wall, and is open to the neck 
posteroinferiorly (Fig. 8.145):
■	 The roof is formed by the inferior surfaces of the greater 
wing of the sphenoid and the temporal bone, contains 
the foramen spinosum, foramen ovale, and the petro­
tympanic fissure, and lateral to the infratemporal crest 
of the greater wing of the sphenoid, is open superiorly 
to the temporal fossa.
■	 The lateral wall is the medial surface of the ramus 
of the mandible, which contains the opening to the 
mandibular canal.
Fig. 8.145  Borders of the infratemporal fossa. 
Foramen spinosum
Infratemporal crest
Foramen ovale
Tensor veli palatini
Levator veli palatini
Alveolar foramen
Lateral plate of pterygoid process
Pterygomaxillary fissure
(leading into pterygopalatine fossa)
Posterior surface of maxilla
Pterygopalatine fossa
Greater wing of sphenoid bone
Masseter
Mylohyoid
Hyoglossus
Middle constrictor
Superior constrictor
Pharynx
Spine of sphenoid
Head and neck of mandible
Petrotympanic fissure
Pterygomandibular raphe

=== PAGE 998 ===
8
971
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
medial surface of the ramus of the mandible near the 
angle of the mandible.
■	 The superficial head originates from the tuberosity of 
the maxilla and adjacent pyramidal process of the pala­
tine bone and joins with the deep head to insert on the 
mandible.
The medial pterygoid mainly elevates the mandible. 
Because it passes obliquely backward to insert into the 
mandible, it also assists the lateral pterygoid muscle in 
protruding the lower jaw.
The medial pterygoid is innervated by the nerve to the 
medial pterygoid from the mandibular nerve [V3].
superiorly to the spine of the sphenoid bone and expands 
inferiorly to attach to the lingula of the mandible and the 
posterior margin of the mandibular foramen (Fig. 8.146).
Medial pterygoid
The medial pterygoid muscle is quadrangular in shape 
and has deep and superficial heads (Fig. 8.146):
■	 The deep head is attached above to the medial surface 
of the lateral plate of the pterygoid process and the asso­
ciated surface of the pyramidal process of the palatine 
bone, and descends obliquely downward, medial to the 
sphenomandibular ligament, to attach to the roughened 
Fig. 8.146  Medial pterygoid muscle. 
Foramen spinosum
Infratemporal crest
Foramen ovale
Tensor veli palatini
Levator veli palatini
Deep head
medial pterygoid
Superficial head
medial pterygoid
Spine of sphenoid
Petrotympanic fissure
Lingula
Mandibular canal
Sphenomandibular ligament

=== PAGE 999 ===
Head and Neck
972
Lateral pterygoid
The lateral pterygoid is a thick triangular muscle and like 
the medial pterygoid muscle has two heads (Fig. 8.147):
■	 The upper head originates from the roof of the infra­
temporal fossa (inferior surface of the greater wing of 
the sphenoid and the infratemporal crest) lateral to the 
foramen ovale and foramen spinosum.
■	 The lower head is larger than the upper head and 
originates from the lateral surface of the lateral plate of 
the pterygoid process, and the inferior part insinuates 
itself between the cranial attachments of the two heads 
of the medial pterygoid.
The fibers from both heads of the lateral pterygoid 
muscle converge to insert into the pterygoid fovea of the 
neck of the mandible and into the capsule of the temporo­
mandibular joint in the region where the capsule is attached 
internally to the articular disc.
Unlike the medial pterygoid muscle whose fibers tend 
to be oriented vertically, those of the lateral pterygoid 
are oriented almost horizontally. As a result, when 
the lateral pterygoid contracts it pulls the articular 
disc and head of the mandible forward onto the articular 
tubercle and is therefore the major protruder of the 
lower jaw.
The lateral pterygoid is innervated by the nerve to the 
lateral pterygoid from the mandibular nerve [V3].
When the lateral and medial pterygoids contract on 
only one side, the chin moves to the opposite side. When 
opposite movements at the two temporomandibular joints 
are coordinated, a chewing movement results.
Mandibular nerve [V3]
The mandibular nerve [V3] is the largest of the three divi­
sions of the trigeminal nerve [V].
Unlike the ophthalmic [V1] and maxillary [V2] nerves, 
which are purely sensory, the mandibular nerve [V3] is 
both motor and sensory.
Fig. 8.147  Lateral pterygoid muscle. 
Infratemporal crest
Upper head of lateral pterygoid
Deep head 
medial pterygoid
Superficial head
medial pterygoid
Lower head
lateral pterygoid
Capsule
Articular disc
Sphenomandibular ligament

=== PAGE 1000 ===
8
973
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
Fig. 8.148  Mandibular nerve [V3]—anterior trunk. Meningeal branch and nerve to medial pterygoid. 
Deep head
medial pterygoid
Trigeminal ganglion
Upper head 
lateral pterygoid (cut )
Lower head 
lateral pterygoid (cut )
Nerve to medial pterygoid
Branch to tensor veli palatini
Meningeal branch
Posterior trunk
Branch to tensor tympani
Anterior trunk
Deep temporal nerves
Buccal nerve
Nerve to lateral pterygoid
Masseteric nerve
In addition to carrying general sensation from the teeth 
and gingivae of the mandible, the anterior two-thirds of the 
tongue, mucosa on the floor of the oral cavity, the lower lip, 
skin over the temple and lower face, and part of the cranial 
dura mater, the mandibular nerve [V3] also carries motor 
innervation to most of the muscles that move the mandible, 
one of the muscles (tensor tympani) in the middle ear, and 
one of the muscles of the soft palate (tensor veli palatini).
All branches of the mandibular nerve [V3] originate in 
the infratemporal fossa.
Like the ophthalmic [V1] and maxillary [V2] nerves, 
the sensory part of the mandibular nerve [V3] originates 
from the trigeminal ganglion in the middle cranial fossa 
(Fig. 8.148):
■	 The sensory part of the mandibular nerve [V3] drops 
vertically through the foramen ovale and enters the 
infratemporal fossa between the tensor veli palatini 
muscle and the upper head of the lateral pterygoid 
muscle.
■	 The small motor root of the trigeminal nerve [V] passes 
medial to the trigeminal ganglion in the cranial cavity, 
then passes through the foramen ovale and immediately 
joins the sensory part of the mandibular nerve [V3].
Branches
Soon after the sensory and motor roots join, the mandibu­
lar nerve [V3] gives rise to a small meningeal branch and 
to the nerve to the medial pterygoid, and then divides into 
anterior and posterior trunks (Fig. 8.148):
■	 Branches from the anterior trunk are the buccal, mas­
seteric, and deep temporal nerves, and the nerve to the 
lateral pterygoid, all of which, except the buccal nerve 
(which is predominantly sensory) are motor nerves.
■	 Branches from the posterior trunk are the auriculotem­
poral, lingual, and inferior alveolar nerves, all of which, 
except a small nerve (nerve to the mylohyoid) that 
branches from the inferior alveolar nerve, are sensory 
nerves.
Meningeal branch
The meningeal branch originates from the medial side of 
the mandibular nerve [V3] and ascends to leave the infra­
temporal fossa with the middle meningeal artery and 
reenter the cranial cavity through the foramen spinosum 
(Fig. 8.148). It is sensory for the dura mater, mainly of the 
middle cranial fossa, and also supplies the mastoid cells 
that communicate with the middle ear.

=== PAGE 1001 ===
Head and Neck
974
Nerve to medial pterygoid
The nerve to the medial pterygoid also originates medially 
from the mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.148). It descends to 
enter and supply the deep surface of the medial pterygoid 
muscle. Near its origin from the mandibular nerve [V3], it 
has two small branches:
■	 One of these supplies the tensor veli palatini.
■	 The other ascends to supply the tensor tympani muscle, 
which occupies a small bony canal above and parallel to 
the pharyngotympanic tube in the temporal bone.
Buccal nerve
The buccal nerve is a branch of the anterior trunk of the 
mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.148). It is predominantly a 
sensory nerve, but may also carry the motor innervation 
to the lateral pterygoid muscle and to part of the temporalis 
muscle.
The buccal nerve passes laterally between the upper 
and lower heads of the lateral pterygoid and then descends 
around the anterior margin of the insertion of the tem­
poralis muscle to the anterior margin of the ramus of the 
mandible, often slipping through the tendon of the tem­
poralis. It continues into the cheek lateral to the buccina­
tor muscle to supply general sensory nerves to the adjacent 
skin and oral mucosa and the buccal gingivae of the lower 
molars.
Masseteric nerve
The masseteric nerve is a branch of the anterior trunk of 
the mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.148; also see Fig. 8.141). 
It passes laterally over the lateral pterygoid muscle and 
through the mandibular notch to penetrate and supply the 
masseter muscle.
Deep temporal nerves
The deep temporal nerves, usually two in number, originate 
from the anterior trunk of the mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 
8.148; also see Fig. 8.144). They pass laterally above the 
lateral pterygoid muscle and curve around the infratempo­
ral crest to ascend in the temporal fossa and supply the 
temporalis muscle from its deep surface.
Nerve to lateral pterygoid
The nerve to the lateral pterygoid may originate directly as 
a branch from the anterior trunk of the mandibular nerve 
[V3] or from its buccal branch (Fig. 8.148). From its origin, 
it passes directly into the deep surface of the lateral ptery­
goid muscle.
Auriculotemporal nerve
The auriculotemporal nerve is the first branch of the pos­
terior trunk of the mandibular nerve [V3] and originates as 
two roots, which pass posteriorly around the middle men­
ingeal artery ascending from the maxillary artery to the 
foramen spinosum (Fig. 8.149).
Petrotympanic fissure
Chorda tympani nerve
Lingual nerve
A
Incisive nerve
Mental nerve
Nerve to mylohyoid
Inferior alveolar nerve
Auriculotemporal nerve
Fig. 8.149  Mandibular nerve [V3]—posterior trunk. A. Lateral view. 

=== PAGE 1002 ===
8
975
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
Medial pterygoid
muscle
Lingula
Lingual nerve
Mental nerve
Incisive nerve
Inferior alveolar
 nerve
Sphenomandibular
 ligament
Chorda tympani
Inferior alveolar nerve
Sphenomandibular
 ligament
Superior constrictor muscle
Submandibular
 ganglion
Nerve to mylohyoid
Greater horns of hyoid bone
Hyoglossus
 muscle
Genioglossus
 muscle
Geniohyoid muscle
Lingual nerve
Temporalis tendon
Pterygomandibular
 raphe (cut )
Buccal nerve
 (branch of anterior trunk)
B
C
Facial nerve 
[VII]
Trigeminal nerve [V]
Mandibular nerve [V3]
B. Anterior view. C. Anteromedial view. 
Fig. 8.149, cont’d
The auriculotemporal nerve passes first between the 
tensor veli palatini muscle and the upper head of the lateral 
pterygoid muscle, and then between the sphenomandibu­
lar ligament and the neck of the mandible. It curves later­
ally around the neck of the mandible and then ascends 
deep to the parotid gland between the temporomandibular 
joint and ear.
The terminal branches of the auriculotemporal nerve 
carry general sensation from skin over a large area of 
the temple. In addition, the auriculotemporal nerve con­
tributes to sensory innervation of the external ear, the 
external auditory meatus, tympanic membrane, and tem­
poromandibular joint. It also delivers postganglionic 
parasympathetic nerves from the glossopharyngeal nerve 
[IX] to the parotid gland.
Lingual nerve
The lingual nerve is a major sensory branch of the pos­
terior trunk of the mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.149A,B). 
It carries general sensation from the anterior two-thirds of 
the tongue, oral mucosa on the floor of the oral cavity, and 
lingual gingivae associated with the lower teeth.
The lingual nerve is joined high in the infratemporal 
fossa by the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve 
[VII] (Fig. 8.149C), which carries:
■	 taste from the anterior two-thirds of the tongue, and
■	 parasympathetic fibers to all salivary glands below the 
level of the oral fissure.
The lingual nerve first descends between the tensor veli 
palatini muscle and the lateral pterygoid muscle, where it 
is joined by the chorda tympani nerve, and then descends 
across the lateral surface of the medial pterygoid muscle to 
enter the oral cavity.
The lingual nerve enters the oral cavity between the 
posterior attachment of the mylohyoid muscle to the 
mylohyoid line and the attachment of the superior con­
strictor of the pharynx to the pterygomandibular raphe. 
As the lingual nerve enters the floor of the oral cavity, 

=== PAGE 1003 ===
Head and Neck
976
Chorda tympani and the lesser petrosal nerve
Branches of two cranial nerves join branches of the man­
dibular nerve [V3] in the infratemporal fossa (Fig. 8.150). 
These are the chorda tympani branch of the facial nerve 
[VII] and the lesser petrosal nerve, a branch of the tym­
panic plexus in the middle ear, which had its origin from a 
branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve [IX] (see Fig. 8.125, 
p. 953).
Chorda tympani
The chorda tympani (Fig. 8.150) carries taste from the 
anterior two-thirds of the tongue and parasympathetic 
innervation to all salivary glands below the level of the oral 
fissure.
The chorda tympani originates from the facial nerve 
[VII] within the temporal bone and in association with the 
mastoid wall of the middle ear, passes anteriorly through 
a small canal, and enters the lateral aspect of the middle 
ear. As it continues anterosuperiorly across the middle ear, 
it is separated from the tympanic membrane by the handle 
of the malleus. It leaves the middle ear through the medial 
end of the petrotympanic fissure, enters the infratemporal 
fossa, descends medial to the spine of the sphenoid and then 
to the lateral pterygoid muscle, and joins the lingual nerve.
Preganglionic parasympathetic fibers carried in the 
chorda tympani synapse with postganglionic parasympa­
thetic fibers in the submandibular ganglion, which “hangs 
off” the lingual nerve in the floor of the oral cavity (Fig. 
8.150).
Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers leave the sub­
mandibular ganglion and either:
■	 reenter the lingual nerve to travel with its terminal 
branches to reach target tissues, or
■	 pass directly from the submandibular ganglion into 
glands (Fig. 8.150).
The taste (SA) fibers do not pass through the ganglion 
and are distributed with terminal branches of the lingual 
nerve.
it is in a shallow groove on the medial surface of the 
mandible immediately inferior to the last molar tooth. 
In this position, it is palpable through the oral mucosa 
and in danger when one is operating on the molar teeth 
and gingivae (Fig. 8.149C).
The lingual nerve passes into the tongue on the lateral 
surface of the hyoglossus muscle where it is attached to 
the submandibular ganglion. This ganglion is where 
the preganglionic parasympathetic fibers carried from the 
infratemporal fossa into the floor of the oral cavity on the 
lingual nerve synapse with postganglionic parasympa­
thetic fibers (see Fig. 8.150).
Inferior alveolar nerve
The inferior alveolar nerve, like the lingual nerve, is 
a major sensory branch of the posterior trunk of the 
mandibular nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.149A–C). In addition to 
innervating all lower teeth and much of the associated 
gingivae, it also supplies the mucosa and skin of the lower 
lip and skin of the chin. It has one motor branch, which 
innervates the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly of 
the digastric muscle.
The inferior alveolar nerve originates deep to the lateral 
pterygoid muscle from the posterior trunk of the man­
dibular nerve [V3] in association with the lingual 
nerve. It descends on the lateral surface of the medial 
pterygoid muscle, passes between the sphenomandibular 
ligament and the ramus of the mandible, and then enters 
the mandibular canal through the mandibular foramen. 
Just before entering the mandibular foramen, it gives 
origin to the nerve to the mylohyoid (Fig. 8.149C), 
which lies in the mylohyoid groove inferior to the foramen 
and continues anteriorly below the floor of the oral cavity 
to innervate the mylohyoid muscle and the anterior belly 
of the digastric muscle.
The inferior alveolar nerve passes anteriorly within the 
mandibular canal of the lower jaw. The mandibular canal 
and its contents are inferior to the roots of the molar teeth, 
and the roots can sometimes curve around the canal 
making extraction of these teeth difficult.
The inferior alveolar nerve supplies branches to the 
three molar teeth and the second premolar tooth and 
associated labial gingivae, and then divides into its two 
terminal branches:
■	 the incisive nerve, which continues in the mandibular 
canal to supply the first premolar, incisor, and canine 
teeth, and related gingivae; and
■	 the mental nerve, which exits the mandible through 
the mental foramen and supplies the lower lip and 
chin (Fig. 8.149A,B). The mental nerve is palpable and 
sometimes visible through the oral mucosa adjacent to 
the roots of the premolar teeth.
In the clinic
Lingual nerve injury
A lingual nerve injury proximal to where the chorda 
tympani joins it in the infratemporal fossa will produce 
loss of general sensation from the anterior two-thirds of 
the tongue, oral mucosa, gingivae, the lower lip, and the 
chin.
If a lingual nerve lesion is distal to the site where it is 
joined by the chorda tympani, secretion from the salivary 
glands below the oral fissure and taste from the anterior 
two-thirds of the tongue will also be lost.

=== PAGE 1005 ===
Head and Neck
978
Lesser petrosal nerve
The lesser petrosal nerve carries mainly parasympathetic 
fibers destined for the parotid gland (Fig. 8.150). The pre­
ganglionic parasympathetic fibers are located in the glos­
sopharyngeal nerve [IX] as it exits the jugular foramen at 
the base of the skull. Branching from the glossopharyngeal 
nerve [IX] either within or immediately outside the jugular 
foramen is the tympanic nerve (Fig. 8.150B).
The tympanic nerve reenters the temporal bone through 
a small foramen on the ridge of bone separating the jugular 
foramen from the carotid canal and ascends through a 
small bony canal (inferior tympanic canaliculus) to the 
promontory located on the labyrinthine (medial) wall of 
the middle ear. Here it participates in the formation of the 
tympanic plexus. The lesser petrosal nerve is a branch of 
this plexus (Fig. 8.150B).
The lesser petrosal nerve contains mainly preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers. It leaves the middle ear and enters 
the middle cranial fossa through a small opening on the 
anterior surface of the petrous part of the temporal bone 
just lateral and inferior to the opening for the greater 
petrosal nerve, a branch of the facial nerve [VII]. The lesser 
petrosal nerve then passes medially and descends through 
the foramen ovale with the mandibular nerve [V3].
In the infratemporal fossa, the preganglionic parasym­
pathetic fibers synapse with cell bodies of postganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers in the otic ganglion located on 
the medial side of the mandibular nerve [V3] around the 
In the clinic
Dental anesthesia
Anesthesia of the inferior alveolar nerve is widely 
practiced by most dentists. The inferior alveolar nerve is 
one of the largest branches of the mandibular nerve [V3], 
carries the sensory branches from the teeth and mandible, 
and receives sensory information from the skin over most 
of the mandible.
The inferior alveolar nerve passes into the mandibular 
canal, courses through the body of the mandible, and 
eventually emerges through the mental foramen into the 
chin.
Dental procedures require perineuronal infiltration 
of the inferior alveolar nerve by local anesthetic. To 
anesthetize this nerve the needle is placed lateral to the 
anterior arch of the fauces (palatoglossal arch) in the oral 
cavity and is advanced along the medial border around 
the inferior third of the ramus of the mandible so that 
anesthetic can be deposited in this region.
It is also possible to anesthetize the infra-orbital and 
buccal nerves, depending on where the anesthesia is 
needed.
origin of the nerve to the medial pterygoid. Postganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers leave the otic ganglion and join 
the auriculotemporal nerve, which carries them to the 
parotid gland.

=== PAGE 1006 ===
8
979
Regional Anatomy  •  Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae
Maxillary artery
The maxillary artery is the largest branch of the external 
carotid artery in the neck and is a major source of blood 
supply for the nasal cavity, the lateral wall and roof of the 
oral cavity, all teeth, and the dura mater in the cranial 
cavity. It passes through and supplies the infratemporal 
fossa and then enters the pterygopalatine fossa, where it 
gives origin to terminal branches (Fig. 8.151).
The maxillary artery originates within the substance of 
the parotid gland and then passes forward, between the 
neck of the mandible and sphenomandibular ligament, 
into the infratemporal fossa. It ascends obliquely through 
the infratemporal fossa to enter the pterygopalatine fossa 
by passing through the pterygomaxillary fissure. This part 
of the vessel may pass either lateral or medial to the lower 
head of the lateral pterygoid. If it passes medial to the lower 
head, the maxillary artery then loops laterally between the 
upper and lower heads of the lateral pterygoid to access the 
pterygomaxillary fissure.
Branches
Branches of the maxillary artery are as follows (Fig. 8.151):
■	 The first part of the maxillary artery (the part between 
the neck of the mandible and the sphenomandibular 
Fig. 8.151  Maxillary artery. 
Branches of middle
meningeal in cranial cavity
Middle meningeal artery
Artery to masseter
Upper head of
lateral pterygoid (cut )
Pterygoid artery
Pterygopalatine fossa
Lower head of lateral
pterygoid (cut )
Buccal artery
Mental artery
Inferior alveolar artery
External carotid
Maxillary artery
Auriculotemporal nerve
Superficial temporal artery
Deep temporal arteries
ligament) gives origin to two major branches (the middle 
meningeal and inferior alveolar arteries) and a number 
of smaller branches (deep auricular, anterior tympanic, 
and accessory meningeal).
■	 The second part of the maxillary artery (the part 
related to the lateral pterygoid muscle) gives origin to 
deep temporal, masseteric, buccal, and pterygoid 
branches, which course with branches of the mandibu­
lar nerve [V3].
■	 The third part of the maxillary artery is in the pterygo­
palatine fossa (see Fig. 8.158)
Middle meningeal artery
The middle meningeal artery ascends vertically from 
the maxillary artery and passes through the foramen 
spinosum to enter the cranial cavity (Fig. 8.151). In the 
infratemporal fossa, it passes superiorly between the sphe­
nomandibular ligament on the medial side and the lateral 
pterygoid muscle on the lateral side. Just inferior to the 
foramen spinosum, it passes between the two roots of the 
auriculotemporal nerve at their origin from the mandibu­
lar nerve [V3] (Fig. 8.151).
The middle meningeal artery is the largest of the men­
ingeal vessels and supplies much of the dura mater, bone, 
and related bone marrow of the cranial cavity walls.

=== PAGE 1007 ===
Head and Neck
980
Within the cranial cavity, the middle meningeal artery 
and its branches travel in the periosteal (outer) layer of 
dura mater, which is tightly adherent to the bony walls. As 
major branches of the middle meningeal artery pass supe­
riorly up the walls of the cranial cavity, they can be 
damaged by lateral blows to the head. When the vessels are 
torn, the leaking blood, which is under arterial pressure, 
slowly separates the dura mater from its attachment to the 
bone, resulting in an extradural hematoma.
Inferior alveolar artery
The inferior alveolar artery descends from the maxillary 
artery to enter the mandibular foramen and canal with the 
inferior alveolar nerve (Fig. 8.151). It is distributed with 
the inferior alveolar nerve and supplies all lower teeth, and 
contributes to the supply of the buccal gingivae, chin, and 
lower lip.
Before entering the mandible, the inferior alveolar 
artery gives origin to a small mylohyoid branch, which 
accompanies the nerve to the mylohyoid.
Deep auricular, anterior tympanic, and accessory 
meningeal arteries
The deep auricular, anterior tympanic, and accessory 
meningeal arteries are small branches from the first part 
of the maxillary artery and contribute to the blood supply 
of the external acoustic meatus, deep surface of the tym­
panic membrane, and cranial dura mater, respectively.
The accessory meningeal branch also contributes small 
branches to surrounding muscles in the infratemporal 
fossa before ascending through the foramen ovale into the 
cranial cavity to supply the dura mater.
Branches from the second part
Deep temporal arteries, usually two in number, originate 
from the second part of the maxillary artery and travel 
with the deep temporal nerves to supply the temporalis 
muscle in the temporal fossa (Fig. 8.151).
Numerous pterygoid arteries also originate from the 
second part of the maxillary artery and supply the ptery­
goid muscles.
The masseteric artery, also from the second part of the 
maxillary artery, accompanies the masseteric nerve later­
ally through the mandibular notch to supply the masseter 
muscle.
The buccal artery is distributed with the buccal nerve 
and supplies skin, muscle, and oral mucosa of the cheek.
Pterygoid plexus
The pterygoid plexus is a network of veins between the 
medial and lateral pterygoid muscles, and between the 
lateral pterygoid and temporalis muscles (Fig. 8.152).
Fig. 8.152  Pterygoid plexus of veins. 
Maxillary vein
Emissary veins
(connect with cavernous sinus)
Inferior ophthalmic vein
Deep facial vein
Facial vein
Inferior alveolar vein
Superficial temporal vein
External jugular vein
Internal jugular vein
Posterior auricular vein
Retromandibular vein

=== PAGE 1008 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pterygopalatine Fossa
8
981
PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA
The pterygopalatine fossa is an inverted teardrop-shaped 
space between bones on the lateral side of the skull imme­
diately posterior to the maxilla (Fig. 8.153).
Although small in size, the pterygopalatine fossa com­
municates via fissures and foramina in its walls with the:
■	 middle cranial fossa,
■	 infratemporal fossa,
■	 floor of the orbit,
■	 lateral wall of the nasal cavity,
■	 oropharynx, and
■	 roof of the oral cavity.
Because of its strategic location, the pterygopalatine 
fossa is a major site of distribution for the maxillary nerve 
[V2] and for the terminal part of the maxillary artery. It 
also contains the pterygopalatine ganglion where pregan­
glionic parasympathetic fibers originating in the facial 
nerve [VII] synapse with postganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers and these fibers, along with sympathetic fibers origi­
nating from the T1 spinal cord level join branches of the 
maxillary nerve [V2].
All the upper teeth receive their innervation and blood 
supply from the maxillary nerve [V2] and the terminal part 
of the maxillary artery, respectively, that pass through the 
pterygopalatine fossa.
Veins that drain regions supplied by arteries branching 
from the maxillary artery in the infratemporal fossa and 
pterygopalatine fossa connect with the pterygoid plexus. 
These tributary veins include those that drain the nasal 
cavity, roof and lateral wall of the oral cavity, all teeth, 
muscles of the infratemporal fossa, paranasal sinuses, and 
nasopharynx. In addition, the inferior ophthalmic vein 
from the orbit can drain through the inferior orbital fissure 
into the pterygoid plexus.
Significantly, small emissary veins often connect the 
pterygoid plexus in the infratemporal fossa to the cavern­
ous sinus in the cranial cavity. These emissary veins, which 
pass through the foramen ovale, through the cartilage that 
fills the foramen lacerum, and through a small sphenoidal 
foramen on the medial side of the lateral plate of the ptery­
goid process at the base of the skull, are a route by which 
infections can spread into the cranial cavity from struc­
tures, such as the teeth, that are drained by the pterygoid 
plexus. Also, because there are no valves in veins of the 
head and neck, anesthetic inadvertently injected under 
pressure into veins of the pterygoid plexus can backflow 
into tissues or into the cranial cavity.
The pterygoid plexus connects:
■	 posteriorly, via a short maxillary vein, with the retro­
mandibular vein in the neck; and
■	 anteriorly, via a deep facial vein, with the facial vein on 
the face.
Fig. 8.153  Pterygopalatine fossa. A. Anterolateral view. B. Lateral view. 
Sphenoid bone
Palatine bone
Inferior orbital fissure
Zygomatic bone
A
B
Sphenopalatine foramen
Maxilla
Palatine canal
Alveolar foramen
Pterygoid canal
Foramen rotundum
Palatovaginal canal
Pterygopalatine fossa

=== PAGE 1009 ===
Head and Neck
982
■	 The maxillary nerve [V2] passes through the most lateral 
and superior of these—the foramen rotundum—
which communicates posteriorly with the middle cranial 
fossa (Fig. 8.154B).
■	 The greater petrosal nerve from the facial nerve [VII] 
and sympathetic fibers from the internal carotid plexus 
join to form the nerve of the pterygoid canal that passes 
forward into the pterygopalatine fossa through the more 
medial and inferior foramen—the anterior opening 
of  the pterygoid canal.
Pterygoid canal
The pterygoid canal (Fig. 8.154A) is a bony canal 
running horizontally through the root of the pterygoid 
process of the sphenoid bone. It opens anteriorly into 
the pterygopalatine fossa. Posteriorly it continues through 
the cartilage filling the foramen lacerum and opens into 
Skeletal framework
The walls of the pterygopalatine fossa are formed by parts 
of the palatine, maxilla, and sphenoid bones (Fig. 8.153):
■	 The anterior wall is formed by the posterior surface 
of the maxilla.
■	 The medial wall is formed by the lateral surface of the 
palatine bone.
■	 The posterior wall and roof are formed by parts of the 
sphenoid bone.
Sphenoid bone
The part of the sphenoid bone that contributes to the for­
mation of the pterygopalatine fossa is the anterosuperior 
surface of the pterygoid process (Fig. 8.154). Opening onto 
this surface are two large foramina:
Fig. 8.154  Sphenoid bone. A. Anterior view. B. Posterosuperior view. 
A
Foramen rotundum
Surface related to
pterygopalatine fossa
Pterygoid canal
Palatovaginal groove
B
Lesser wing
Greater wing
Foramen rotundum
Posterior opening of bony part of 
pterygoid canal
Pterygoid process
Part of pterygoid canal in
cartilage of foramen lacerum
Cartilage filling foramen lacerum
Greater petrosal nerve of VII
Maxillary nerve [V2]
Internal carotid artery
Superior orbital fissure

=== PAGE 1010 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pterygopalatine Fossa
8
983
Fig. 8.155  Gateways of the pterygopalatine fossa. 
Sphenopalatine foramen
nasal cavity
Inferior orbital fissure
floor of orbit
Pterygomaxillary fissure
infratemporal fossa
Palatine canal
roof of oral cavity (palate)
Pterygoid canal
cranial cavity
(middle cranial fossa)
Foramen rotundum
cranial cavity
(middle cranial fossa)
Palatovaginal canal
nasopharynx
the middle cranial fossa just anteroinferior to the internal 
carotid artery as the vessel enters the cranial cavity through 
the carotid canal (Fig. 8.154B).
Gateways
Seven foramina and fissures provide apertures through 
which structures enter and leave the pterygopalatine fossa 
(Fig. 8.155):
■	 The foramen rotundum and pterygoid canal communi­
cate with the middle cranial fossa and open onto the 
posterior wall.
■	 A small palatovaginal canal opens onto the posterior 
wall and leads to the nasopharynx.
■	 The palatine canal leads to the roof of the oral cavity 
(hard palate) and opens inferiorly.
■	 The sphenopalatine foramen opens onto the lateral wall 
of the nasal cavity and is in the medial wall.
■	 The lateral aspect of the pterygopalatine fossa is con­
tinuous with the infratemporal fossa via a large gap (the 
pterygomaxillary fissure) between the posterior 
surface of the maxilla and pterygoid process of the 
sphenoid bone.
■	 The superior aspect of the anterior wall of the fossa 
opens into the floor of the orbit via the inferior orbital 
fissure.
Contents
The maxillary nerve [V2] and terminal part of the maxil­
lary artery enter and branch within the pterygopalatine 
fossa. In addition, the nerve of the pterygoid canal enters 
the fossa carrying:
■	 preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the greater 
petrosal branch of the facial nerve [VII], and
■	 postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the deep petrosal 
branch of the carotid plexus.
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers synapse in 
the pterygopalatine ganglion and both the sympathetic 
and postganglionic parasympathetic fibers pass with 
branches of the maxillary nerve [V2] out of the fossa and 
into adjacent regions.
In addition to nerves and arteries, veins and lymphatics 
also pass through the pterygopalatine fossa.

=== PAGE 1011 ===
Head and Neck
984
Greater and lesser palatine nerves.  The greater and 
lesser palatine nerves (Fig. 8.156) pass inferiorly from 
the pterygopalatine ganglion, enter and pass through the 
palatine canal, and enter the oral surface of the palate 
through the greater and lesser palatine foramina.
The greater palatine nerve passes forward on the roof 
of the oral cavity to innervate mucosa and glands of the 
hard palate and the adjacent gingiva, almost as far forward 
as the incisor teeth.
In the palatine canal, the greater palatine nerve gives 
origin to posterior inferior nasal nerves, which pass 
medially through small foramina in the perpendicular 
plate of the palatine bone and contribute to the innerva­
tion of the lateral nasal wall.
After passing through the lesser palatine foramen, 
the lesser palatine nerve passes posteriorly to supply the 
soft palate.
Nasal nerves.  The nasal nerves (Fig. 8.156), approxi­
mately seven in number, pass medially through the 
sphenopalatine foramen to enter the nasal cavity. Most 
pass anteriorly to supply the lateral wall of the nasal 
cavity, while others pass across the roof to supply the 
medial wall.
One of the nerves passing across the roof to supply the 
medial wall of the nasal cavity (the nasopalatine nerve) 
is the largest of the nasal nerves and passes anteriorly 
Maxillary nerve [V2]
The maxillary nerve [V2] is purely sensory. It originates 
from the trigeminal ganglion in the cranial cavity, exits the 
middle cranial fossa, and enters the pterygopalatine fossa 
through the foramen rotundum (Fig. 8.156). It passes 
anteriorly through the fossa and exits as the infra-orbital 
nerve through the inferior orbital fissure.
While passing through the pterygopalatine fossa, the 
maxillary nerve [V2] gives rise to the zygomatic nerve, the 
posterior superior alveolar nerve, and two ganglionic 
branches (Fig. 8.156). The two ganglionic branches origi­
nate from its inferior surface and pass through the ptery­
gopalatine ganglion.
Postganglionic parasympathetic fibers, arising in the 
pterygopalatine ganglion, join the general sensory branches 
of the maxillary nerve [V2] in the pterygopalatine ganglion, 
as do postganglionic sympathetic fibers from the carotid 
plexus. The three types of fibers leave the ganglion as 
orbital, palatine, nasal, and pharyngeal branches.
Branches
Orbital branches.  The orbital branches are small and 
pass through the inferior orbital fissure to contribute to the 
supply of the orbital wall and of the sphenoidal and eth­
moidal sinuses.
Fig. 8.156  Maxillary nerve [V2]. A. Terminal branches. B. In relationship to the pterygopalatine ganglion. 
Zygomaticotemporal
A
B
Zygomaticofacial
Infra-orbital
Anterior superior alveolar
Middle superior alveolar
Posterior superior alveolar
Greater palatine
Soft palate
Lesser palatine
Nasopharynx
Pharyngeal nerve
V1
V2
V2
V3
Sphenopalatine foramen
Nasal nerves
Zygomatic
Orbital branches
Zygomatic nerve
Infra-orbital nerve
Posterior superior
alveolar
Palatine nerves
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Ganglionic branches
Foramen rotundum
Pharyngeal nerve
Palatovaginal canal
Pterygoid canal

=== PAGE 1013 ===
Head and Neck
986
■	 mucous glands in the nasal cavity,
■	 salivary glands in the upper half of the oral cavity, and
■	 the lacrimal gland in the orbit.
The greater petrosal nerve also carries some taste (SA) 
fibers from the soft palate in the lesser palatine nerve.
Deep petrosal nerve
The deep petrosal nerve is formed by postganglionic 
sympathetic fibers that originate in the superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion in the neck and leave the ganglion 
as the internal carotid nerve.
Preganglionic fibers that synapse in the ganglion are 
from the T1 spinal nerve.
The internal carotid nerve forms the internal carotid 
plexus around the internal carotid artery as the internal 
carotid artery passes through the skull and into the cranial 
cavity. Some of the fibers from the internal carotid plexus 
converge to form the deep petrosal nerve, which leaves the 
internal carotid plexus in the middle cranial fossa and joins 
the greater petrosal branch of the facial nerve [VII].
The deep petrosal nerve carries postganglionic sympa­
thetic fibers destined mainly for blood vessels.
Pterygopalatine ganglion
The nerve of the pterygoid canal enters the superior 
surface of the cartilage that fills the foramen lacerum and 
passes anteriorly through the cartilage to enter the ptery­
goid canal in the root of the pterygoid process of the 
sphenoid bone. It passes through the canal and into the 
Nerve of  the pterygoid canal and the 
pterygopalatine ganglion
The nerve of the pterygoid canal (Fig. 8.157) is formed in 
the middle cranial fossa by the union of:
■	 the greater petrosal nerve (a branch of the facial nerve 
[VII]), and
■	 the deep petrosal nerve (a branch of the internal carotid 
plexus).
The nerve of the pterygoid canal passes into the ptery­
gopalatine fossa and joins the pterygopalatine ganglion. It 
carries mainly preganglionic parasympathetic and post­
ganglionic sympathetic fibers.
Greater petrosal nerve
The greater petrosal nerve, which originates from the 
geniculate ganglion of the facial nerve [VII] in the temporal 
bone, exits the temporal bone through a small canal that 
opens via a fissure onto the anterior surface of the petrous 
part of the temporal bone. It passes anteromedially along 
the posterior margin of the middle cranial fossa and then 
under the internal carotid artery to reach the superior 
surface of the cartilage filling the foramen lacerum.
As the greater petrosal nerve passes under the internal 
carotid artery, it is joined by the deep petrosal nerve to form 
the nerve of the pterygoid canal.
The greater petrosal nerve carries parasympathetic 
innervation to all glands above the oral fissure, including:
Fig. 8.157  Nerve of the pterygoid canal. A. Overview. B. In relationship to the pterygopalatine ganglion. 
A
B
Lacrimal nerve
Lacrimal gland
Parasympathetic nerves in 
branch of zygomaticotemporal nerve
Zygomatic nerve
Nerve of pterygoid canal
Cartilage filling 
foramen lacerum
Deep petrosal nerve
Internal 
carotid 
nerve
Facial
nerve [VII]
Preganglionic 
sympathetic 
nerves from T1
Superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion
Sympathetic trunk
Geniculate ganglion
Greater petrosal nerve
Internal carotid plexus
[V1]
[V2]
[V3]
Internal
 carotid
 artery
Pterygopalatine fossa
Inferior orbital fissure
Infra-orbital nerve
Preganglionic parasympathetic nerves
Postganglionic parasympathetic nerves
Preganglionic sympathetic nerves
Postganglionic sympathetic nerves
Nerve of pterygoid canal

=== PAGE 1014 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pterygopalatine Fossa
8
987
lateral orbital wall to join the lacrimal nerve (Fig. 8.157; 
also see Fig. 8.87).
The lacrimal nerve is a major general sensory branch of 
the ophthalmic nerve [V1], which passes forward in the 
orbit at the margin between the lateral wall and roof.
The postganglionic parasympathetic and sympathetic 
fibers pass with the lacrimal nerve to the lacrimal gland.
A lesion anywhere along the course of parasympa­
thetic fibers that leave the brain as part of the facial nerve 
[VII] and are ultimately carried to the lacrimal gland 
along branches of the ophthalmic nerve [V1] results in 
“dry eye” and can eventually lead to loss of vision in the 
affected eye.
Maxillary artery
The maxillary artery is a major branch of the external 
carotid artery in the neck. It originates adjacent to the neck 
of the mandible, passes forward through the infratemporal 
fossa, and then enters the pterygopalatine fossa through 
the pterygomaxillary fissure (Fig. 8.158).
The part of the maxillary artery in the pterygopalatine 
fossa (the third part) is anterior to the pterygopalatine 
ganglion and gives origin to branches that accompany 
branches of the maxillary nerve [V2] and the pterygopala­
tine ganglion.
Branches of the maxillary artery include the posterior 
superior alveolar, infra-orbital, greater palatine, pharyn­
geal, and sphenopalatine arteries, and the artery of the 
pterygoid canal (Fig. 8.158). Collectively, these branches 
supply much of the nasal cavity, the roof of the oral cavity, 
pterygopalatine fossa where it joins the pterygopalatine 
ganglion formed around the branches of the maxillary 
nerve [V2] (Fig. 8.157).
The pterygopalatine ganglion is the largest of the 
four parasympathetic ganglia in the head and is formed by 
the cell bodies of the postganglionic neurons associated 
with preganglionic parasympathetic fibers of the facial 
nerve [VII] carried by the greater petrosal nerve and the 
nerve of the pterygoid canal.
The postganglionic parasympathetic fibers that origi­
nate in the pterygopalatine ganglion, together with post­
ganglionic sympathetic fibers passing through the 
ganglion, join fibers from the ganglionic branches of the 
maxillary nerve [V2] to form orbital, palatine, nasal, and 
pharyngeal branches, which leave the ganglion.
Other postganglionic parasympathetic and sympathetic 
fibers pass superiorly through the ganglionic branches of 
the maxillary nerve [V2] to enter the main trunk of the 
maxillary nerve and be distributed with the zygomatic, 
posterior superior alveolar, and infra-orbital nerves. Of 
these, the postganglionic parasympathetic and sympa­
thetic fibers that pass into the orbit with the zygomatic 
nerve are particularly important because they ultimately 
innervate the lacrimal gland.
Innervation of the lacrimal gland
Approximately midway along the orbital wall, the postgan­
glionic parasympathetic and sympathetic fibers leave the 
zygomaticotemporal branch of the zygomatic nerve and 
form a special autonomic nerve, which travels up the 
Fig. 8.158  Maxillary artery in the pterygopalatine fossa. 
Pharyngeal artery
Sphenopalatine artery
Infra-orbital artery
Septal part of greater palatine artery
Anterior superior 
alveolar artery
Posterior superior alveolar artery
Greater palatine artery
Lesser palatine artery
Maxillary artery in
infratemporal fossa
Nasopharynx
Artery of pterygoid canal
Cartilage filling foramen lacerum

=== PAGE 1015 ===
Head and Neck
988
■	 posterior lateral nasal arteries, which supply the lateral 
wall of the nasal cavity and contribute to the supply of 
the paranasal sinuses; and
■	 posterior septal branches, which travel medially across 
the roof to supply the nasal septum—the largest of 
these branches passes anteriorly down the septum to 
anastomose with the end of the greater palatine artery.
Artery of pterygoid canal.  The artery of  the pterygoid 
canal passes posteriorly into the pterygoid canal. It sup­
plies surrounding tissues and terminates, after passing 
inferiorly through cartilage filling the foramen lacerum, in 
the mucosa of the nasopharynx.
Veins
Veins that drain areas supplied by branches of the terminal 
part of the maxillary artery generally travel with these 
branches back into the pterygopalatine fossa.
The veins coalesce in the pterygopalatine fossa and then 
pass laterally through the pterygomaxillary fissure to join 
the pterygoid plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa 
(Fig. 8.159).
The infra-orbital vein, which drains the inferior aspect 
of the orbit, may pass directly into the infratemporal fossa 
through the lateral aspect of the inferior orbital fissure, so 
bypassing the pterygopalatine fossa.
and all upper teeth. In addition, they contribute to the 
blood supply of the sinuses, oropharynx, and floor of the 
orbit.
Branches
Posterior superior alveolar artery.  The posterior 
superior alveolar artery (Fig. 8.158) originates from the 
maxillary artery as it passes through the pterygomaxillary 
fissure. It meets the posterior superior alveolar nerve, 
accompanies it through the alveolar foramen on the infra­
temporal surface of the maxilla, and supplies the molar 
and premolar teeth, adjacent gingiva, and the maxillary 
sinus.
Infra-orbital artery.  The infra-orbital artery (Fig. 8.158) 
passes forward with the infra-orbital nerve and leaves the 
pterygopalatine fossa through the inferior orbital fissure. 
With the infra-orbital nerve, it lies in the infra-orbital 
groove and infra-orbital canal, and emerges through the 
infra-orbital foramen to supply parts of the face.
Within the infra-orbital canal, the infra-orbital artery 
gives origin to:
■	 branches that contribute to the blood supply of struc­
tures near the floor of the orbit—the inferior rectus and 
inferior oblique muscles, and the lacrimal sac; and
■	 anterior superior alveolar arteries (Fig. 8.158), 
which supply the incisor and canine teeth and the 
maxillary sinus.
Greater palatine artery.  The greater palatine artery 
(Fig. 8.158) passes inferiorly with the palatine nerves into 
the palatine canal. It gives origin to a lesser palatine 
branch (Fig. 8.158), which passes through the lesser 
palatine foramen to supply the soft palate, and then 
continues through the greater palatine foramen to 
supply the hard palate. The latter vessel passes forward 
on the inferior surface of the palate to enter the incisive 
fossa and pass superiorly through the incisive canal to 
supply the anterior aspect of the septal wall of the nasal 
cavity.
Pharyngeal branch.  The pharyngeal branch (Fig. 
8.158) of the maxillary artery travels posteriorly and 
leaves the pterygopalatine fossa through the palatovaginal 
canal with the pharyngeal nerve. It supplies the posterior 
aspect of the roof of the nasal cavity, the sphenoidal sinus, 
and the pharyngotympanic tube.
Sphenopalatine artery.  The sphenopalatine artery (Fig. 
8.158) is the terminal branch of the maxillary artery. It 
leaves the pterygopalatine fossa medially through the sphe­
nopalatine foramen and accompanies the nasal nerves, 
giving off:
Fig. 8.159  Veins of the pterygopalatine fossa. 
Infra-orbital vein
Pterygoid plexus in infratemporal fossa

=== PAGE 1016 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
989
NECK
The neck is a tube providing continuity from the head 
to the trunk. It extends anteriorly from the lower border of 
the mandible to the upper surface of the manubrium of the 
sternum, and posteriorly from the superior nuchal line 
on the occipital bone of the skull to the intervertebral 
disc between the CVII and TI vertebrae. Within the tube, 
four compartments provide longitudinal organization 
(Fig. 8.160):
■	 The visceral compartment is anterior and contains 
parts of the digestive and respiratory systems, and 
several endocrine glands.
■	 The vertebral compartment is posterior and contains 
the cervical vertebrae, spinal cord, cervical nerves, and 
muscles associated with the vertebral column.
■	 The two vascular compartments, one on each side, are 
lateral and contain the major blood vessels and the 
vagus nerve [X].
All these compartments are contained within unique 
layers of cervical fascia.
For descriptive purposes the neck is divided into anterior 
and posterior triangles (Fig. 8.161):
■	 The boundaries of the anterior triangle are the ante­
rior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the 
inferior border of the mandible, and the midline of the 
neck.
■	 The boundaries of the posterior triangle are the pos­
terior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the 
Fig. 8.160  Compartments of the neck. 
Anterior
Compartments
Visceral
Vascular
Vertebral
Posterior
Fascia
Superficial
Pretracheal
Investing
Carotid
sheath
Prevertebral
Fig. 8.161  Anterior and posterior triangles of the neck. 
Inferior border of mandible
Anterior
triangle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Clavicle
Trapezius muscle
Posterior
triangle
anterior border of the trapezius muscle, and the middle 
one-third of the clavicle.
Fascia
The fascia of the neck has a number of unique features.
The superficial fascia in the neck contains a thin sheet 
of muscle (the platysma), which begins in the superficial 
fascia of the thorax, runs upward to attach to the mandible 
and blend with the muscles on the face, is innervated by 
the cervical branch of the facial nerve [VII], and is only 
found in this location.
Deep to the superficial fascia, the deep cervical fascia is 
organized into several distinct layers (Fig. 8.160). These 
include:
■	 an investing layer, which surrounds all structures in the 
neck;
■	 the prevertebral layer, which surrounds the vertebral 
column and the deep muscles associated with the back;
■	 the pretracheal layer, which encloses the viscera of the 
neck; and
■	 the carotid sheaths, which receive a contribution from 
the other three fascial layers and surround the two 
major neurovascular bundles on either side of the neck.

=== PAGE 1017 ===
Head and Neck
990
Prevertebral layer
The prevertebral layer is a cylindrical layer of fascia that 
surrounds the vertebral column and the muscles 
associated with it (Fig. 8.162). Muscles in this group 
include the prevertebral muscles, the anterior, middle, 
and posterior scalene muscles, and the deep muscles of 
the back.
The prevertebral fascia is attached posteriorly along the 
length of the ligamentum nuchae, and superiorly forms a 
continuous circular line attaching to the base of the skull. 
This circle begins:
■	 anteriorly as the fascia attaches to the basilar part of the 
occipital bone, the area of the jugular foramen, and the 
carotid canal;
■	 continues laterally, attaching to the mastoid process; 
and
■	 continues posteriorly along the superior nuchal line 
ending at the external occipital protuberance, where it 
associates with its partner from the opposite side.
Anteriorly, the prevertebral fascia is attached to the 
anterior surfaces of the transverse processes and bodies of 
vertebrae CI to CVII.
Investing layer
The investing layer completely surrounds the neck and 
encloses the trapezius and sternocleidomastoid muscles 
(Fig. 8.162).
Attaching posteriorly to the ligamentum nuchae and the 
spinous process of the CVII vertebra, this fascial layer splits 
as it passes forward to enclose the trapezius muscle, reunites 
into a single layer as it forms the roof of the posterior triangle, 
splits again to surround the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and 
reunites again to join its twin from the other side.
Anteriorly, the investing fascia merges with fascia sur­
rounding the infrahyoid muscles.
The investing fascia is attached:
■	 superiorly to the external occipital protuberance and 
the superior nuchal line,
■	 laterally to the mastoid process and zygomatic arch, and
■	 inferiorly to the spine of the scapula, the acromion, the 
clavicle, and the manubrium of the sternum.
The external and anterior jugular veins, and the lesser 
occipital, great auricular, transverse cervical, and supra­
clavicular nerves, all branches of the cervical plexus, pierce 
the investing fascia.
Fig. 8.162  Fascia of neck, transverse view. 
Trachea
Esophagus
Pretracheal layer
Thyroid
Carotid sheath
Internal jugular vein
Vagus nerve
Common carotid artery
Scalene muscle
Prevertebral layer
Trapezius muscle
Investing layer
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Infrahyoid muscles     

=== PAGE 1018 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
991
internal jugular vein, and the vagus nerve as these struc­
tures pass through the neck (Fig. 8.162).
It receives contributions from the investing, preverte­
bral, and pretracheal layers, though the extent of each 
component’s contribution varies.
Fascial compartments
The arrangement of the various layers of cervical fascia 
organizes the neck into four longitudinal compartments 
(Fig. 8.160):
■	 The first compartment is the largest, includes the other 
three, and consists of the area surrounded by the invest­
ing layer.
■	 The second compartment consists of the vertebral 
column and the deep muscles associated with this 
structure, and is the area contained within the prever­
tebral layer.
■	 The third compartment (the visceral compartment) 
contains the pharynx, the trachea, the esophagus, and 
the thyroid gland, which are surrounded by the pretra­
cheal layer.
■	 Finally, there is a compartment (the carotid sheath) 
consisting of the neurovascular structures that pass 
from the base of the skull to the thoracic cavity, and the 
sheath enclosing these structures receives contributions 
from the other cervical fascias.
Fascial spaces
Between the fascial layers in the neck are spaces that may 
provide a conduit for the spread of infections from the neck 
to the mediastinum.
Three spaces could be involved in this process 
(Fig. 8.163):
The prevertebral fascia passing between the attachment 
points on the transverse processes is unique. In this 
location, it splits into two layers, creating a longitudinal 
fascial space containing loose connective tissue that 
extends from the base of the skull through the thorax (Figs. 
8.162 and 8.163).
There is one additional specialization of the prevertebral 
fascia in the lower region of the neck. The prevertebral 
fascia in an anterolateral position extends from the anterior 
and middle scalene muscles to surround the brachial 
plexus and subclavian artery as these structures pass into 
the axilla. This fascial extension is the axillary sheath.
Pretracheal layer
The pretracheal layer consists of a collection of fascias 
that surround the trachea, esophagus, and thyroid gland 
(Fig. 8.162). Anteriorly, it consists of a pretracheal fascia 
that crosses the neck and encloses the infrahyoid muscles, 
and covers the trachea and the thyroid gland. The pretra­
cheal fascia begins superiorly at the hyoid bone and ends 
inferiorly in the upper thoracic cavity. Laterally, this fascia 
encloses the thyroid gland and more posteriorly is continu­
ous with fascia that surrounds the esophagus.
Posterior to the pharynx, the pretracheal layer is referred 
to as the buccopharyngeal fascia and separates the pharynx 
from the prevertebral layer (Fig. 8.163).
The buccopharyngeal fascia begins superiorly at the 
base of the skull and merges with fascia covering the 
esophagus that then continues inferiorly into the thoracic 
cavity.
Carotid sheath
Each carotid sheath is a column of fascia that surrounds 
the common carotid artery, the internal carotid artery, the 
Fig. 8.163  Fascia of the neck, sagittal view. 
Investing layer
Infrahyoid muscles
Pretracheal fascia
Manubrium of sternum
Pretracheal space
Fascial space within prevertebral layer
Retropharyngeal space
Prevertebral layer
Buccopharyngeal fascia
(posterior portion of
pretracheal layer)

=== PAGE 1020 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
993
(draining superficial areas of the back of the neck) and the 
transverse cervical and suprascapular veins (draining 
the posterior scapular region).
Anterior jugular veins
The anterior jugular veins, although variable and 
inconsistent, are usually described as draining the anterior 
aspect of the neck (Fig. 8.164). These paired venous 
channels, which begin as small veins, come together at 
or just superior to the hyoid bone. Once formed, each 
anterior jugular vein descends on either side of the midline 
of the neck.
Inferiorly, near the medial attachment of the sternoclei­
domastoid muscle, each anterior jugular vein pierces the 
investing layer of cervical fascia to enter the subclavian 
vein. Occasionally, the anterior jugular vein may enter the 
external jugular vein immediately before the external 
jugular vein enters the subclavian vein.
Often, the right and left anterior jugular veins commu­
nicate with each other, being connected by a jugular 
venous arch in the area of the suprasternal notch.
■	 The posterior auricular vein drains the scalp behind and 
above the ear.
■	 The retromandibular vein is formed when the superfi­
cial temporal and maxillary veins join in the sub­
stance of the parotid gland and it descends to the angle 
of mandible, where it divides into an anterior and a 
posterior division (Fig. 8.164)—the posterior division 
joins the posterior auricular vein to form the external 
jugular vein, and the anterior division joins the facial 
vein to form the common facial vein, which passes deep 
and becomes a tributary to the internal jugular vein.
Once formed, the external jugular vein passes straight 
down the neck in the superficial fascia and is superficial to 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle throughout its course, 
crossing it diagonally as it descends.
Reaching the lower part of the neck, just superior to the 
clavicle and immediately posterior to the sternocleidomas­
toid muscle, the external jugular vein pierces the investing 
layer of cervical fascia, passes deep to the clavicle, and 
enters the subclavian vein.
Tributaries received by the external jugular vein along 
its course include the posterior external jugular vein 

=== PAGE 1022 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
995
■	 The carotid triangle is outlined by the superior belly 
of the omohyoid muscle anteroinferiorly, the stylohyoid 
muscle and posterior belly of the digastric superiorly, 
and the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle posteriorly.
Each of these triangles contains numerous structures 
that can be identified as being within a specific triangle, 
passing into a specific triangle from outside the area, origi­
nating in one triangle and passing to another triangle, or 
passing through several triangles while passing through 
the region.
A discussion of the anterior triangle of the neck must 
therefore combine a systemic approach, describing the 
muscles, vessels, and nerves in the area, with a regional 
approach, describing the contents of each triangle.
Anterior triangle of the neck
The anterior triangle of the neck is outlined by the anterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle laterally, the 
inferior border of the mandible superiorly, and the midline 
of the neck medially (Fig. 8.166). It is further subdivided 
into several smaller triangles as follows:
■	 The submandibular triangle is outlined by the infe­
rior border of the mandible superiorly and the anterior 
and posterior bellies of the digastric muscle inferiorly.
■	 The submental triangle is outlined by the hyoid bone 
inferiorly, the anterior belly of the digastric muscle later­
ally, and the midline.
■	 The muscular triangle is outlined by the hyoid bone 
superiorly, the superior belly of the omohyoid muscle, 
and the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid 
muscle laterally, and the midline.
Fig. 8.166  Borders and subdivisions of the anterior triangle of the neck. 
Submandibular triangle
Anterior belly of
digastric muscle
Submental triangle
Hyoid bone
Superior belly of omohyoid muscle
Muscular triangle
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Trapezius muscle
Posterior triangle
Carotid triangle
Stylohyoid muscle
Posterior belly of digastric muscle

=== PAGE 1027 ===
Head and Neck
1000
in the carotid triangle (Fig. 8.170), which is a subdivision 
of the anterior triangle of the neck (see Fig. 8.166).
At the bifurcation, the common carotid artery and the 
beginning of the internal carotid artery are dilated. This 
dilation is the carotid sinus (Fig. 8.171) and contains 
receptors that monitor changes in blood pressure and are 
innervated by a branch of the glossopharyngeal nerve [IX].
Another accumulation of receptors in the area of the 
bifurcation is responsible for detecting changes in blood 
chemistry, primarily oxygen content. This is the carotid 
body and is innervated by branches from both the glos­
sopharyngeal [IX] and vagus [X] nerves.
Internal carotid arteries
After its origin, the internal carotid artery ascends toward 
the base of the skull (Fig. 8.171). It gives off no branches 
in the neck and enters the cranial cavity through the 
carotid canal in the petrous part of the temporal bone.
The internal carotid arteries supply the cerebral hemi­
spheres, the eyes and the contents of the orbits, and the 
forehead.
External carotid arteries
The external carotid arteries begin giving off branches 
immediately after the bifurcation of the common carotid 
arteries (Fig. 8.171 and Table 8.13) as follows:
Fig. 8.170  Carotid triangle. 
Sternocleidomastoid
muscle
Carotid triangle
Superior belly of
omohyoid muscle
Common carotid artery
Posterior belly of digastric muscle
Internal carotid artery
External carotid artery

=== PAGE 1028 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1001
Table 8.13  Branches of the external carotid artery
Branch
Supplies
Superior thyroid artery
Thyrohyoid muscle, internal structures of the larynx, sternocleidomastoid and cricothyroid muscles, thyroid 
gland
Ascending pharyngeal artery
Pharyngeal constrictors and stylopharyngeus muscle, palate, palatine tonsil, pharyngotympanic tube, 
meninges in posterior cranial fossa
Lingual artery
Muscles of the tongue, palatine tonsil, soft palate, epiglottis, floor of mouth, sublingual gland
Facial artery
All structures in the face from the inferior border of the mandible anterior to the masseter muscle to the 
medial corner of the eye, the soft palate, palatine tonsil, pharyngotympanic tube, submandibular gland
Occipital artery
Sternocleidomastoid muscle, meninges in posterior cranial fossa, mastoid cells, deep muscles of the back, 
posterior scalp
Posterior auricular artery
Parotid gland and nearby muscles, external ear and scalp posterior to ear, middle and inner ear structures
Superficial temporal artery
Parotid gland and duct, masseter muscle, lateral face, anterior part of external ear, temporalis muscle, parietal 
and temporal fossae
Maxillary artery
External acoustic meatus, lateral and medial surface of tympanic membrane, temporomandibular joint, dura 
mater on lateral wall of skull and inner table of cranial bones, trigeminal ganglion and dura in vicinity, 
mylohyoid muscle, mandibular teeth, skin on chin, temporalis muscle, outer table of bones of skull in 
temporal fossa, structures in infratemporal fossa, maxillary sinus, upper teeth and gingivae, infra-orbital skin, 
palate, roof of pharynx, nasal cavity
Fig. 8.171  Carotid system. 
Superficial temporal artery
Maxillary artery
Facial artery
Common carotid artery
Carotid sinus
Ascending pharyngeal
artery
Occipital artery
Posterior auricular artery
Superior thyroid artery
Internal jugular vein
External carotid artery
Lingual artery
Thyroid gland
Internal carotid artery

=== PAGE 1029 ===
Head and Neck
1002
The internal jugular vein traverses the neck within the 
carotid sheath, initially posterior to the internal carotid 
artery, but passes to a more lateral position farther down. 
It remains lateral to the common carotid artery through 
the rest of the neck with the vagus nerve [X] posterior and 
partially between the two vessels.
The paired internal jugular veins join with the subcla­
vian veins posterior to the sternal end of the clavicle 
to form the right and left brachiocephalic veins 
(Fig. 8.169).
Tributaries to each internal jugular vein include 
the inferior petrosal sinus, and the facial, lingual, pha­
ryngeal, occipital, superior thyroid, and middle 
thyroid veins.
■	 The superior thyroid artery is the first branch—it 
arises from the anterior surface near or at the bifurca­
tion and passes in a downward and forward direction to 
reach the superior pole of the thyroid gland.
■	 The ascending pharyngeal artery is the second and 
smallest branch—it arises from the posterior aspect of 
the external carotid artery and ascends between the 
internal carotid artery and the pharynx.
■	 The lingual artery arises from the anterior surface 
of the external carotid artery just above the superior 
thyroid artery at the level of the hyoid bone, passes 
deep to the hypoglossal nerve [XII], and passes between 
the middle constrictor of the pharynx and hyoglossus 
muscles.
■	 The facial artery is the third anterior branch of the 
external carotid artery—it arises just above the lingual 
artery, passes deep to the stylohyoid and posterior belly 
of the digastric muscles, continues deep between the 
submandibular gland and mandible, and emerges over 
the edge of the mandible just anterior to the masseter 
muscle, to enter the face.
■	 The occipital artery arises from the posterior surface 
of the external carotid artery, near the level of origin of 
the facial artery, passes upward and posteriorly deep to 
the posterior belly of the digastric muscle, and emerges 
on the posterior aspect of the scalp.
■	 The posterior auricular artery is a small branch 
arising from the posterior surface of the external carotid 
artery and passes upward and posteriorly.
■	 The superficial temporal artery is one of the terminal 
branches and appears as an upward continuation of the 
external carotid artery—beginning posterior to the neck 
of the mandible, it passes anterior to the ear, crosses the 
zygomatic process of the temporal bone, and above this 
point divides into anterior and posterior branches.
■	 The maxillary artery is the larger of the two terminal 
branches of the external carotid artery—arising poste­
rior to the neck of the mandible, it passes through the 
parotid gland, continues medial to the neck of the 
mandible and into the infratemporal fossa, and contin­
ues through this area into the pterygopalatine fossa.
Veins
Collecting blood from the skull, brain, superficial face, and 
parts of the neck, the internal jugular vein begins as a 
dilated continuation of the sigmoid sinus, which is a 
dural venous sinus. This initial dilated part is referred to 
as the superior bulb of  jugular vein and receives 
another dural venous sinus (the inferior petrosal 
sinus) soon after it is formed. It exits the skull through the 
jugular foramen associated with the glossopharyngeal 
[IX], vagus [X], and accessory [XI] nerves, and enters the 
carotid sheath.
In the clinic
Jugular venous pulse
The jugular venous pulse is an important clinical sign that 
enables the physician to assess the venous pressure and 
waveform and is a reflection of the functioning of the 
right side of the heart.
Nerves
Numerous cranial and peripheral nerves:
■	 pass through the anterior triangle of the neck as they 
continue to their final destination,
■	 send branches to structures in or forming boundaries of 
the anterior triangle of the neck, and
■	 while in the anterior triangle of the neck, send branches 
to nearby structures.
The cranial nerves in these categories include the facial 
[VII], glossopharyngeal [IX], vagus [X], accessory [XI], and 
hypoglossal [XII].
Branches of spinal nerves in these categories include the 
transverse cervical nerve from the cervical plexus and the 
upper and lower roots of the ansa cervicalis.
Facial nerve [VII]
After emerging from the stylomastoid foramen, the facial 
nerve [VII] gives off branches that innervate two muscles 
associated with the anterior triangle of the neck:
■	 the posterior belly of the digastric, and
■	 the stylohyoid.
The facial nerve [VII] also innervates the platysma 
muscle that overlies the anterior triangle and part of the 
posterior triangle of the neck.

=== PAGE 1031 ===
Head and Neck
1004
of the internal jugular vein as it passes downward and 
backward to disappear either into or beneath the anterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 8.174).
The accessory nerve gives off no branches as it passes 
through the anterior triangle of the neck.
Hypoglossal nerve [XII]
The hypoglossal nerve [XII] leaves the cranial cavity 
through the hypoglossal canal and is medial to the internal 
jugular vein and internal carotid artery immediately 
outside the skull. As it descends, it passes outward between 
the internal jugular vein and internal carotid artery (Fig. 
8.175). At this point it passes forward, hooking around 
the occipital artery, across the lateral surfaces of the inter­
nal and external carotid arteries and the lingual artery, 
and then continues deep to the posterior belly of the 
digastric and stylohyoid muscles. It passes over the surface 
of the hyoglossus muscle and disappears deep to the mylo­
hyoid muscle.
Fig. 8.174  Accessory nerve [XI] in the posterior triangle of the 
neck. 
Internal jugular vein
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Accessory nerve [XI]
Trapezius muscle
Internal carotid artery
Fig. 8.175  Hypoglossal nerve [XII]. A. Surgical view of hypoglossal nerve in anterior triangle of the neck. B. Diagram. 
Hyoglossus muscle
External carotid
artery
Superior root of
ansa cervicalis
Superior thyroid artery
Internal jugular vein
Internal jugular
vein
Posterior belly of
digastric muscle (cut )
Stylohyoid muscle
Sternocleidomastoid
branch of occipital artery
Hypoglossal nerve
Hypoglossal nerve
Sternocleidomastoid branch
of occipital artery
Posterior belly of digastric muscle
Occipital artery
A
B

=== PAGE 1032 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1005
The hypoglossal nerve [XII], which supplies the tongue, 
does not give off any branches as it passes through the 
anterior triangle of the neck.
Transverse cervical nerve
The transverse cervical nerve is a branch of the cervical 
plexus arising from the anterior rami of cervical nerves C2 
and C3. It emerges from beneath the posterior border of 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle, near the middle of the 
muscle, and loops around the sternocleidomastoid to cross 
its anterior surface in a transverse direction (Fig. 8.176). 
It continues across the neck and provides cutaneous inner­
vation to this area.
Ansa cervicalis
The ansa cervicalis is a loop of nerve fibers from cervical 
nerves C1 to C3 that innervate the “strap muscles” in the 
anterior triangle of the neck (Fig. 8.177). It begins as 
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Transverse cervical nerve
Trapezius muscle
Fig. 8.176  Transverse cervical nerve in the anterior triangle of the 
neck. 
Hypoglossal nerve
C1
C3
C2
Superior root of ansa cervicalis
Inferior root of ansa cervicalis
Omohyoid muscle
(superior belly)
Sternohyoid muscle
Sternothyroid muscle
Thyrohyoid muscle
Omohyoid muscle
(inferior belly)
Fig. 8.177  Ansa cervicalis. 

=== PAGE 1035 ===
Head and Neck
1008
Arterial supply
Two major arteries supply the thyroid gland.
Superior thyroid artery.  The superior thyroid artery is the 
first branch of the external carotid artery (Fig. 8.179). It 
descends, passing along the lateral margin of the thyrohy­
oid muscle, to reach the superior pole of the lateral lobe of 
the gland where it divides into anterior and posterior 
glandular branches:
■	 The anterior glandular branch passes along the 
superior border of the thyroid gland and anastomoses 
with its twin from the opposite side across the isthmus 
(Fig. 8.179).
■	 The posterior glandular branch passes to the poste­
rior side of the gland and may anastomose with the 
inferior thyroid artery (Fig. 8.180).
Inferior thyroid artery.  The inferior thyroid artery is 
a branch of the thyrocervical trunk, which arises from 
the first part of the subclavian artery (Figs. 8.179 and 
8.180). It ascends along the medial edge of the anterior 
scalene muscle, passes posteriorly to the carotid sheath, 
and reaches the inferior pole of the lateral lobe of the 
thyroid gland.
Fig. 8.179  Vasculature of the thyroid: anterior view. 
Thyrohyoid
 muscle
Superior thyroid
artery and vein
Middle thyroid 
vein
Anterior
glandular
branch
Inferior
thyroid artery
Inferior
thyroid veins
Left vagus nerve
Left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Right recurrent
laryngeal nerve
Right vagus
nerve
Thyrocervical 
trunk
At the thyroid gland the inferior thyroid artery divides 
into an:
■	 inferior branch, which supplies the lower part of the 
thyroid gland and anastomoses with the posterior 
branch of the superior thyroid artery, and
■	 an ascending branch, which supplies the parathyroid 
glands.
Fig. 8.180  Superior and inferior thyroid arteries and left and right 
recurrent laryngeal nerves and thyroid and parathyroid glands. A. 
Posterior view. B. Surgical (anterolateral) view of parathyroid gland 
with left lobe of thyroid retracted. 
Superior 
parathyroid 
gland
Thyrocervical 
trunk
Right recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Inferior 
parathyroid 
gland
Left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Left subclavian
 artery
Inferior thyroid
 artery
Superior
 thyroid artery
Posterior
glandular
branch
A
B
Left lobe of thyroid gland
Parathyroid gland

=== PAGE 1038 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1011
Location of structures in different regions 
of the anterior triangle of the neck
The regional location of major structures in the anterior 
triangle of the neck is summarized in Table 8.14. Structures 
can be identified as being within a specific subdivision, 
Table 8.14  Subdivisions of the anterior triangle of the neck—a regional approach
Subdivision
Boundaries
Contents
Submental triangle 
(unpaired)
Mandibular symphysis; anterior belly of digastric 
muscle; body of hyoid bone
Submental lymph nodes; tributaries forming the anterior 
jugular vein
Submandibular triangle 
(paired)
Lower border of mandible; anterior belly of digastric 
muscle; posterior belly of digastric muscle
Submandibular gland; submandibular lymph nodes; 
hypoglossal nerve [XII]; mylohyoid nerve; facial artery and 
vein
Carotid triangle (paired)
Posterior belly of digastric muscle; superior belly of 
omohyoid muscle; anterior border of 
sternocleidomastoid muscle
Tributaries to common facial vein; cervical branch of facial 
nerve [VII]; common carotid artery; external and internal 
carotid arteries; superior thyroid; ascending pharyngeal; 
lingual, facial, and occipital arteries; internal jugular vein; 
vagus [X], accessory [XI], and hypoglossal [XII] nerves; 
superior and inferior roots of ansa cervicalis; transverse 
cervical nerve
Muscular triangle (paired)
Midline of neck; superior belly of omohyoid muscle; 
anterior border of sternocleidomastoid muscle
Sternohyoid, omohyoid, sternohyoid, and thyrohyoid 
muscles; thyroid and parathyroid glands; pharynx
In the clinic
Ectopic parathyroid glands
The parathyroid glands develop from the third and fourth 
pharyngeal pouches and translocate to their more adult 
locations during development. The position of the glands 
can be highly variable, sometimes being situated high in the 
neck or in the thorax. Tumors develop in any of these 
locations (Fig. 8.182).
A
B
C
Adenoma
Fig. 8.182  Ectopic parathyroid adenoma in superior mediastinum. Noncontrast hybrid single photon emission computed tomography/
computed tomography (SPECT/CT). A. Transverse view. B. Sagittal view. C. Coronal view. 
passing into a specific subdivision from outside the area, 
originating in one subdivision and passing to another 
subdivision, or passing through several subdivisions while 
traversing the region.

=== PAGE 1039 ===
Head and Neck
1012
Posterior triangle of the neck
The posterior triangle of the neck is on the lateral aspect 
of the neck in direct continuity with the upper limb (Fig. 
8.183). It is bordered:
■	 anteriorly by the posterior edge of the sternocleidomas­
toid muscle,
■	 posteriorly by the anterior edge of the trapezius muscle,
■	 basally by the middle one-third of the clavicle, and
■	 apically by the occipital bone just posterior to the 
mastoid process where the attachments of the trapezius 
and sternocleidomastoid come together.
Fig. 8.183  Borders of the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Trapezius muscle
Omoclavicular or
subclavian triangle
Occipital triangle
Hyoid bone
Posterior
triangle
Superior belly of
omohyoid muscle
Inferior belly of omohyoid muscle
The roof of the posterior triangle consists of an 
investing layer of cervical fascia that surrounds the ster­
nocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles as it passes through 
the region.
The muscular floor of the posterior triangle is covered 
by the prevertebral layer of cervical fascia; and from 
superior to inferior consists of the splenius capitis, levator 
scapulae, and the posterior, middle, and anterior scalene 
muscles.

=== PAGE 1040 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1013
Muscles
Numerous muscles participate in forming the borders and 
floor of the posterior triangle of the neck (Table 8.15).
In addition, the omohyoid muscle passes across the 
inferior part of the posterior triangle before disappearing 
under the sternocleidomastoid muscle and emerging in the 
anterior triangle (Fig. 8.184). It is enclosed in the investing 
layer of cervical fascia and crosses the posterior triangle 
from lateral to medial as it continues in a superior direc­
tion. It originates on the superior border of the scapula, 
just medial to the scapular notch and eventually inserts 
into the inferior border of the body of the hyoid bone. It 
has two bellies connected by a tendon, which is anchored 
by a fascial sling to the clavicle:
■	 The superior belly is in the anterior triangle.
■	 The inferior belly crosses the posterior triangle, subdi­
viding it into a small, omoclavicular or subclavian 
Table 8.15  Muscles associated with the posterior triangle of the neck; parentheses indicate possible involvement
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Sternocleidomastoid
—Sternal head
Upper part of anterior surface 
of manubrium of sternum
Lateral one-half of superior 
nuchal line
Accessory nerve [XI] and 
branches from anterior 
rami of C2 to C3 (C4)
Individually—will tilt head 
toward shoulder on same side 
rotating head to turn face to 
opposite side; acting together, 
draw head forward
—Clavicular head
Superior surface of medial 
one-third of clavicle
Lateral surface of mastoid 
process
Trapezius
Superior nuchal line; external 
occipital protuberance; 
ligamentum nuchae; spinous 
processes of vertebrae CVII to 
TXII
Lateral one-third of clavicle; 
acromion; spine of scapula
Motor—accessory nerve 
[XI]; proprioception—C3 
and C4
Assists in rotating the scapula 
during abduction of humerus 
above horizontal;
upper fibers—elevate,
middle fibers—adduct,
lower fibers—depress scapula
Splenius capitis
Lower half of ligamentum 
nuchae; spinous processes of 
vertebrae CVII to TIV
Mastoid process, skull below 
lateral one-third of superior 
nuchal line
Posterior rami of middle 
cervical nerves
Together, draw head 
backward; individually, draw 
and rotate head to one side 
(turn face to same side)
Levator scapulae
Transverse processes of CI to 
CIV
Upper part of medial border 
of scapula
C3, C4; and dorsal scapular 
nerve (C4, C5)
Elevates scapula
Posterior scalene
Posterior tubercles of 
transverse processes of 
vertebrae CIV to CVI
Upper surface of rib II
Anterior rami of C5 to C7
Elevation of rib II
Middle scalene
Transverse processes of 
vertebrae CII to CVII
Upper surface of rib I 
posterior to the groove for 
the subclavian artery
Anterior rami of C3 to C7
Elevation of rib I
Anterior scalene
Anterior tubercles of the 
transverse processes of 
vertebrae CIII to CVI
Scalene tubercle and upper 
surface of rib I
Anterior rami of C4 to C7
Elevation of rib I
Omohyoid
Superior border of scapula 
medial to scapular notch
Inferior border of body of 
hyoid bone
Ansa cervicalis; anterior 
rami of C1 to C3
Depress the hyoid bone
triangle inferiorly and a much larger occipital tri­
angle superiorly.
The omohyoid is innervated by branches of the ansa 
cervicalis (anterior rami from C1 to C3) and it depresses 
the hyoid bone.
Vessels
External jugular vein
One of the most superficial structures passing through the 
posterior triangle of the neck is the external jugular vein 
(Fig. 8.185). This large vein forms near the angle of the 
mandible, when the posterior branch of the retromandibu­
lar and posterior auricular veins join, and descends through 
the neck in the superficial fascia.
After crossing the sternocleidomastoid muscle, the 
external jugular vein enters the posterior triangle and 
continues its vertical descent.

=== PAGE 1041 ===
Head and Neck
1014
Fig. 8.184  Muscles of the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Clavicle
Inferior belly of omohyoid muscle
Acromion of
scapula
Trapezius muscle
Anterior scalene muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Posterior scalene muscle
Levator scapulae muscle
Splenius capitis muscle
Fig. 8.185  External jugular vein in the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Posterior auricular vein
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Anterior jugular vein
External jugular vein
Posterior external jugular vein
Trapezius muscle
Suprascapular vein
Transverse cervical vein
Retromandibular vein

=== PAGE 1042 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1015
The second part of  the subclavian artery passes 
laterally between the anterior and middle scalene muscles, 
and one branch may arise from it.
The third part of  the subclavian artery emerges 
from between the anterior and middle scalene muscles to 
cross the base of the posterior triangle (Fig. 8.186). It 
extends from the lateral border of the anterior scalene 
muscle to the lateral border of rib I where it becomes the 
axillary artery and continues into the upper limb.
A single branch (the dorsal scapular artery) may 
arise from the third part of the subclavian artery. This 
branch passes posterolaterally to reach the superior angle 
of the scapula where it descends along the medial border 
of the scapula posterior to the rhomboid muscles.
Transverse cervical and suprascapular arteries
Two other small arteries also cross the base of the pos­
terior triangle. These are the transverse cervical and the 
In the lower part of the posterior triangle, the external 
jugular vein pierces the investing layer of cervical fascia 
and ends in the subclavian vein.
Tributaries to the external jugular vein while it tra­
verses the posterior triangle of the neck include the 
transverse cervical, suprascapular, and anterior jugular 
veins.
Subclavian artery and its branches
Several arteries are found within the boundaries of the 
posterior triangle of the neck. The largest is the third part 
of the subclavian artery as it crosses the base of the poste­
rior triangle (Fig. 8.186).
The first part of  the subclavian artery ascends to 
the medial border of the anterior scalene muscle from 
either the brachiocephalic trunk on the right side or directly 
from the arch of the aorta on the left side. It has numerous 
branches.
Fig. 8.186  Arteries in the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Trapezius muscle
Middle scalene muscle
Transverse cervical artery
Brachial plexus
Suprascapular artery
3rd part of subclavian artery
Phrenic nerve
Anterior scalene muscle
Subclavian vein
External jugular vein
Internal jugular vein
Clavicle
1st part of subclavian artery
Vagus nerve
Common carotid artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Inferior thyroid artery
Sternocleidomastoid muscle

=== PAGE 1043 ===
Head and Neck
1016
suprascapular arteries (Fig. 8.186). They are both branches 
of the thyrocervical trunk, which arises from the first part 
of the subclavian artery.
After branching from the thyrocervical trunk, the 
transverse cervical artery passes laterally and slightly 
posteriorly across the base of the posterior triangle anterior 
to the anterior scalene muscle and the brachial plexus. 
Reaching the deep surface of the trapezius muscle, it 
divides into superficial and deep branches:
■	 The superficial branch continues on the deep surface 
of the trapezius muscle.
■	 The deep branch continues on the deep surface of the 
rhomboid muscles near the medial border of the scapula.
The suprascapular artery, also a branch of the thy­
rocervical trunk, passes laterally, in a slightly downward 
direction across the lowest part of the posterior triangle, 
and ends up posterior to the clavicle (Fig. 8.186). Approach­
ing the scapula, it passes over the superior transverse 
scapular ligament and distributes branches to muscles on 
the posterior surface of the scapula.
Veins
Veins accompany all the arteries described previously.
The subclavian vein is a continuation of the axillary 
vein and begins at the lateral border of rib I. As it crosses 
the base of the posterior triangle, the external jugular, and, 
possibly, the suprascapular and transverse cervical veins 
enter it (Fig. 8.185). It ends by joining with the internal 
jugular vein to form the brachiocephalic vein near the 
sternoclavicular joint. In the posterior triangle it is anterior 
to, and slightly lower than, the subclavian artery and 
passes anterior to the anterior scalene muscle.
Transverse cervical and suprascapular veins travel with 
each of the similarly named arteries. These veins become 
tributaries to either the external jugular vein or the initial 
part of the subclavian vein.
Nerves
A variety of nerves pass through or are within the posterior 
triangle. These include the accessory nerve [XI], branches 
of the cervical plexus, components forming the brachial 
plexus, and branches of the brachial plexus.
Accessory nerve
The accessory nerve [XI] exits the cranial cavity through 
the jugular foramen. It descends through the neck in 
a posterior direction, to reach the anterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle. Passing either deep to or 
through and innervating the sternocleidomastoid muscle, 
the accessory nerve [XI] continues to descend and enters 
the posterior triangle (Fig. 8.187). It crosses the posterior 
triangle, still in an obliquely downward direction, within 
Fig. 8.187  Accessory nerve and cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus in the posterior triangle of the neck. 
Lesser occipital nerve
Accessory nerve [XI]
Trapezius muscle
Supraclavicular nerves
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Transverse cervical nerve
Great auricular nerve

=== PAGE 1044 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1017
the investing layer of cervical fascia as this fascia crosses 
between the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. 
When the accessory nerve [XI] reaches the anterior border 
of the trapezius muscle, it continues on the deep surface of 
the trapezius and innervates it. The superficial location of 
the accessory nerve as it crosses the posterior triangle 
makes it susceptible to injury.
Cervical plexus
The cervical plexus is formed by the anterior rami of cervi­
cal nerves C1 to C4 (Fig. 8.188).
The cervical plexus forms in the substance of the 
muscles making up the floor of the posterior triangle 
within the prevertebral layer of cervical fascia, and consists 
of:
■	 muscular (or deep) branches, and
■	 cutaneous (or superficial) branches.
The cutaneous branches are visible in the posterior tri­
angle emerging from beneath the posterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 8.187).
Fig. 8.188  Cervical plexus. 
Lesser occipital
nerve
C1
C2
C3
C4
To C5
Phrenic nerve
Supraclavicular nerve
Inferior root of
ansa cervicalis
Transverse
cervical nerve
Superior root of
ansa cervicalis
Great auricular
nerve
Muscular branches
Muscular (deep) branches of the cervical plexus distribute 
to several groups of muscles. A major branch is the 
phrenic nerve, which supplies the diaphragm with both 
sensory and motor innervation (Fig. 8.188). It arises from 
the anterior rami of cervical nerves C3 to C5. Hooking 
around the upper lateral border of the anterior scalene 
muscle, the nerve continues inferiorly across the anterior 
surface of the anterior scalene within the prevertebral 
fascia to enter the thorax (Fig. 8.189). As the nerve 
descends in the neck, it is “pinned” to the anterior scalene 
muscle by the transverse cervical and suprascapular 
arteries.
Several muscular branches of the cervical plexus supply 
prevertebral and lateral vertebral muscles, including the 
rectus capitis anterior, rectus capitis lateralis, longus colli, 
and longus capitis (Fig. 8.189 and Table 8.16).
The cervical plexus also contributes to the formation 
of the superior and inferior roots of the ansa cervicalis 
(Fig. 8.188). This loop of nerves receives contributions 
from the anterior rami of the cervical nerves C1 to C3 and 
innervates the infrahyoid muscles.

=== PAGE 1045 ===
Head and Neck
1018
Fig. 8.189  Prevertebral and lateral vertebral muscles supplied by cervical plexus. 
Longus capitis muscle
Levator scapulae muscle
Longus colli muscle
Anterior
Middle
Posterior
Scalene muscles
Rectus capitis anterior muscle
Rectus capitis lateralis muscle
Phrenic nerve
Table 8.16  Prevertebral and lateral vertebral muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Rectus capitis anterior
Anterior surface of lateral part of 
atlas and its transverse process
Inferior surface of basilar 
part of occipital bone
Branches from anterior 
rami of C1, C2
Flexes head at 
atlanto-occipital joint
Rectus capitis lateralis
Superior surface of transverse 
process of atlas
Inferior surface of jugular 
process of occipital bone
Branches from anterior 
rami of C1, C2
Flexes head laterally to same 
side
Longus colli
—Superior oblique part
Anterior tubercles of transverse 
processes of vertebrae CIII to CV
Tubercle of anterior arch 
of atlas
Branches from anterior 
rami of C2 to C6
Flexes neck anteriorly and 
laterally and slight rotation to 
opposite side
—Inferior oblique part
Anterior surface of bodies of 
vertebrae TI, TII, and maybe TIII
Anterior tubercles of 
transverse processes of 
vertebrae CV and CVI
—Vertical part
Anterior surface of bodies of TI to 
TIII and CV to CVII
Anterior surface of bodies 
of vertebrae CII to CIV
Longus capitis
Tendinous slips to transverse 
processes of vertebrae CIII to CVI
Inferior surface of basilar 
part of occipital bone
Branches from anterior 
rami of C1 to C3
Flexes the head

=== PAGE 1046 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1019
Cutaneous branches
Cutaneous (superficial) branches of the cervical plexus are 
visible in the posterior triangle as they pass outward from 
the posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
(Figs. 8.187 and 8.188):
■	 The lesser occipital nerve consists of contributions 
from cervical nerve C2 (Fig. 8.188), ascends along the 
posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and 
distributes to the skin of the neck and scalp posterior to 
the ear.
■	 The great auricular nerve consists of branches from 
cervical nerves C2 and C3, emerges from the posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and ascends 
across the muscle to the base of the ear, supplying the 
skin of the parotid region, the ear, and the mastoid area.
■	 The transverse cervical nerve consists of branches 
from the cervical nerves C2 and C3, passes around the 
midpart of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and contin­
ues horizontally across the muscle to supply the lateral 
and anterior parts of the neck.
■	 The supraclavicular nerves are a group of cutaneous 
nerves from cervical nerves C3 and C4 that, after emerging 
from beneath the posterior border of the sternocleido­
mastoid muscle, descend and supply the skin over the 
clavicle and shoulder as far inferiorly as rib II.
Brachial plexus
The brachial plexus forms from the anterior rami of cervical 
nerves C5 to C8 and thoracic nerve T1. The contributions 
Fig. 8.190  Root of the neck. 
Trachea
Rib I
Manubrium of sternum
Cervical pleura
TI vertebra
Esophagus
of each of these nerves, which are between the anterior 
and middle scalene muscles, are the roots of the brachial 
plexus. As the roots emerge from between these muscles, 
they form the next component of the brachial plexus (the 
trunks) as follows:
■	 the anterior rami of C5 and C6 form the upper trunk,
■	 the anterior ramus of C7 forms the middle trunk,
■	 the anterior rami of C8 and T1 form the lower trunk.
The trunks cross the base of the posterior triangle 
(see Fig. 8.186). Several branches of the brachial plexus 
may be visible in the posterior triangle (see Fig. 7.54 on pg. 
730). These include the:
■	 dorsal scapular nerve to the rhomboid muscles,
■	 long thoracic nerve to the serratus anterior muscle,
■	 nerve to the subclavius muscle, and
■	 suprascapular nerve to the supraspinatus and infra­
spinatus muscles.
Root of the neck
The root of the neck (Fig. 8.190) is the area immediately 
superior to the superior thoracic aperture and axillary 
inlets. It is bounded by:

=== PAGE 1047 ===
Head and Neck
1020
Fig. 8.191  Vasculature of the root of the neck. 
C6 vertebral body
Anterior scalene muscle
Vertebral artery
Ascending cervical artery
Costocervical trunk
Thyrocervical trunk
Left subclavian 
artery
Rib I
Internal thoracic 
artery
Left common 
carotid artery
Trachea
Esophagus
Right subclavian
artery
Supreme intercostal artery
Suprascapular artery
Transverse cervical artery
Deep cervical artery
Inferior thyroid artery
■	 the top of the manubrium of the sternum and superior 
margin of the clavicle anteriorly, and
■	 the top of the thoracic vertebra TI and the superior 
margin of the scapula to the coracoid process 
posteriorly.
It contains structures passing between the neck, 
thorax, and upper limb. There is also an extension of the 
thoracic cavity projecting into the root of the neck (Fig. 
8.190). This consists of an upward projection of the pleural 
cavity, on both sides, and includes the cervical part of the 
parietal pleura (cupula), and the apical part of the superior 
lobe of each lung.
Anteriorly, the pleural cavity extends above the top of 
the manubrium of the sternum and superior border of rib 
I, while posteriorly, due to the downward slope of the 
superior thoracic aperture, the pleural cavity remains 
below the top of vertebra TI.
Vessels
Subclavian arteries
The subclavian arteries on both sides arch upward out of 
the thorax to enter the root of the neck (Fig. 8.191).
The right subclavian artery begins posterior to the 
sternoclavicular joint as one of two terminal branches 
of the brachiocephalic trunk. It arches superiorly and 
laterally to pass anterior to the extension of the pleural 
cavity in the root of the neck and posterior to the anterior 
scalene muscle. Continuing laterally across rib I, it becomes 
the axillary artery as it crosses its lateral border.
The left subclavian artery begins lower in the thorax 
than the right subclavian artery as a direct branch of the 
arch of the aorta. Lying posterior to the left common 
carotid artery and lateral to the trachea, it ascends and 
arches laterally, passing anterior to the extension of the 
pleural cavity and posterior to the anterior scalene muscle. 

=== PAGE 1048 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Neck
8
1021
Transverse cervical artery.  The middle branch of the thy­
rocervical trunk is the transverse cervical artery (Fig. 
8.191). This branch passes laterally, across the anterior 
surface of the anterior scalene muscle and the phrenic 
nerve, and enters and crosses the base of the posterior 
triangle of the neck. It continues to the deep surface of the 
trapezius muscle, where it divides into superficial and deep 
branches:
■	 The superficial branch continues on the deep surface 
of the trapezius muscle.
■	 The deep branch continues on the deep surface of the 
rhomboid muscles near the medial border of the scapula.
Suprascapular artery.  The lowest branch of the thyrocer­
vical trunk is the suprascapular artery (Fig. 8.191). This 
branch passes laterally, crossing anterior to the anterior 
scalene muscle, the phrenic nerve, the third part of the 
subclavian artery, and the trunks of the brachial plexus. 
At the superior border of the scapula, it crosses over the 
superior transverse scapular ligament and enters the 
supraspinatus fossa.
Internal thoracic artery
The third branch of the subclavian artery is the internal 
thoracic artery (Fig. 8.191). This artery branches from 
the inferior edge of the subclavian artery and descends.
It passes posterior to the clavicle and the large veins in 
the region and anterior to the pleural cavity. It enters the 
thoracic cavity posterior to the ribs and anterior to the 
transversus thoracis muscle and continues to descend 
giving off numerous branches.
Costocervical trunk
The final branch of the subclavian artery in the root of the 
neck is the costocervical trunk (Fig. 8.191). It arises in 
a slightly different position, depending on the side:
■	 On the left, it arises from the first part of the subclavian 
artery, just medial to the anterior scalene muscle.
■	 On the right, it arises from the second part of the sub­
clavian artery.
On both sides, the costocervical trunk ascends and 
passes posteriorly over the dome of the pleural cavity and 
continues in a posterior direction behind the anterior 
scalene muscle. Eventually it divides into two branches—
the deep cervical and the supreme intercostal arteries:
■	 The deep cervical artery ascends in the back of the 
neck and anastomoses with the descending branch of 
the occipital artery.
It continues laterally over rib I, and becomes the axillary 
artery as it crosses the lateral border of rib I.
Both subclavian arteries are divided into three parts by 
the anterior scalene muscle (Fig. 8.191):
■	 The first part extends from the origin of the artery to the 
anterior scalene muscle.
■	 The second part is the part of the artery posterior to the 
anterior scalene muscle.
■	 The third part is the part lateral to the anterior scalene 
muscle before the artery reaches the lateral border 
of rib I.
All branches from the right and left subclavian arteries 
arise from the first part of the artery, except in the case 
of one branch (the costocervical trunk) on the right side 
(Fig. 8.191). The branches include the vertebral artery, the 
thyrocervical trunk, the internal thoracic artery, and the 
costocervical trunk.
Vertebral artery
The vertebral artery is the first branch of the subclavian 
artery as it enters the root of the neck (Fig. 8.191). A large 
branch, arising from the first part of the subclavian artery 
medial to the anterior scalene muscle, it ascends and enters 
the foramen in the transverse process of vertebra CVI. 
Continuing to pass superiorly, the vertebral artery passes 
through the foramina of vertebrae CV to CI. At the superior 
border of vertebra CI, the artery turns medially and crosses 
the posterior arch of vertebra CI. From here it passes 
through the foramen magnum to enter the posterior 
cranial fossa.
Thyrocervical trunk
The second branch of the subclavian artery is the thyro­
cervical trunk (Fig. 8.191). It arises from the first part 
of the subclavian artery medial to the anterior scalene 
muscle, and divides into three branches—the inferior 
thyroid, the transverse cervical, and the suprascapular 
arteries.
Inferior thyroid artery.  The inferior thyroid artery (Fig. 
8.191) is the superior continuation of the thyrocervical 
trunk. It ascends, anterior to the anterior scalene muscle, 
and eventually turns medially, crossing posterior to the 
carotid sheath and its contents and anterior to the vertebral 
artery. Reaching the posterior surface of the thyroid gland 
it supplies the thyroid gland.
When the inferior thyroid artery turns medially, it gives 
off an important branch (the ascending cervical artery), 
which continues to ascend on the anterior surface of the 
prevertebral muscles, supplying these muscles and sending 
branches to the spinal cord.

=== PAGE 1049 ===
Head and Neck
1022
Nerves
Several nerves and components of the nervous system pass 
through the root of the neck.
Phrenic nerves
The phrenic nerves are branches of the cervical plexus 
and arise on each side as contributions from the anterior 
rami of cervical nerves C3 to C5 come together. Passing 
around the upper lateral border of each anterior scalene 
muscle, the phrenic nerves continue inferiorly across 
the anterior surface of each anterior scalene muscle within 
the prevertebral layer of cervical fascia (Fig. 8.192). 
Leaving the lower edge of the anterior scalene muscle 
each phrenic nerve passes between the subclavian vein 
and artery to enter the thorax and continue to the 
diaphragm.
■	 The supreme intercostal artery descends anterior to 
rib I and divides to form the posterior intercostal arteries 
for the first two intercostal spaces.
Veins
Numerous veins pass through the root of the neck. Small 
veins accompany each of the arteries described above, and 
large veins form major drainage channels.
The subclavian veins begin at the lateral margin of rib 
I as continuations of the axillary veins. Passing medially 
on each side, just anterior to the anterior scalene muscles, 
each subclavian vein is joined by the internal jugular vein 
to form the brachiocephalic veins.
The only tributary to each subclavian vein is an external 
jugular vein.
The veins accompanying the numerous arteries in this 
region empty into other veins.
Fig. 8.192  Nerves in the root of the neck. 
Thyroid cartilage
Inferior thyroid artery
Thyroid gland left lobe (elevated )
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Trachea
Common carotid artery
Left brachiocephalic vein
Subclavian vein
Subclavian artery
Phrenic nerve
Left vagus nerve [X]

=== PAGE 1055 ===
Head and Neck
1028
drainage of the face and scalp. Their pattern of drainage is 
very similar to the area of distribution of the arteries near 
their location.
Beginning posteriorly these groups (Fig. 8.197) are:
■	 occipital nodes near the attachment of the trapezius 
muscle to the skull and associated with the occipital 
artery—lymphatic drainage is from the posterior scalp 
and neck;
■	 mastoid nodes (retro-auricular/posterior auricu­
lar nodes) posterior to the ear near the attachment of 
the sternocleidomastoid muscle and associated with the 
posterior auricular artery—lymphatic drainage is from 
the posterolateral half of the scalp;
■	 pre-auricular and parotid nodes anterior to the ear 
and associated with the superficial temporal and trans­
verse facial arteries—lymphatic drainage is from the 
anterior surface of the auricle, the anterolateral scalp, 
the upper half of the face, the eyelids, and the cheeks;
■	 submandibular nodes inferior to the body of the 
mandible and associated with the facial artery—
lymphatic drainage is from structures along the path of 
the facial artery as high as the forehead, as well as the 
gingivae, the teeth, and the tongue;
■	 submental nodes inferior and posterior to the chin—
lymphatic drainage is from the center part of the lower 
lip, the chin, the floor of the mouth, the tip of the 
tongue, and the lower incisor teeth.
Lymphatic flow from these superficial lymph nodes 
passes in several directions:
■	 Drainage from the occipital and mastoid nodes passes to 
the superficial cervical nodes along the external jugular 
vein.
■	 Drainage from the pre-auricular and parotid nodes, the 
submandibular nodes, and the submental nodes passes 
to the deep cervical nodes.
Superficial cervical lymph nodes
The superficial cervical nodes are a collection of lymph 
nodes along the external jugular vein on the superficial 
surface of the sternocleidomastoid muscle (Fig. 8.197). 
They primarily receive lymphatic drainage from the poste­
rior and posterolateral regions of the scalp through the 
occipital and mastoid nodes, and send lymphatic vessels in 
the direction of the deep cervical nodes.
Deep cervical lymph nodes
The deep cervical nodes are a collection of lymph 
nodes that form a chain along the internal jugular 
vein (Fig. 8.197). They are divided into upper and lower 
groups where the intermediate tendon of the omohyoid 
muscle crosses the common carotid artery and the internal 
jugular vein.
The most superior node in the upper deep cervical group 
is the jugulodigastric node (Fig. 8.197). This large node 
is where the posterior belly of the digastric muscle crosses 
the internal jugular vein and receives lymphatic drainage 
from the tonsils and tonsillar region.
Another large node, usually associated with the lower 
deep cervical group because it is at or just inferior to the 
intermediate tendon of the omohyoid muscle, is the 
jugulo-omohyoid node (Fig. 8.197). This node receives 
lymphatic drainage from the tongue.
The deep cervical nodes eventually receive all lymphatic 
drainage from the head and neck either directly or through 
regional groups of nodes.
From the deep cervical nodes, lymphatic vessels form 
the right and left jugular trunks, which empty into the 
right lymphatic duct on the right side or the thoracic duct 
on the left side.
In the clinic
Clinical lymphatic drainage of the head and neck
Enlargement of the neck lymph nodes (cervical 
lymphadenopathy) is a common manifestation of disease 
processes that occur in the head and neck. It is also a 
common manifestation of diffuse diseases of the body, 
which include lymphoma, sarcoidosis, and certain types 
of viral infection such as glandular fever and human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection.
Evaluation of cervical lymph nodes is extremely 
important in determining the nature and etiology of 
the primary disease process that has produced nodal 
enlargement.
Clinical evaluation includes a general health assessment, 
particularly relating to symptoms from the head and neck. 
Examination of the nodes themselves often gives the 
clinician a clue as to the nature of the pathological process.
■	 Soft, tender, and inflamed lymph nodes suggest an 
acute inflammatory process, which is most likely to be 
infective.

=== PAGE 1056 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pharynx
8
1029
PHARYNX
The pharynx is a musculofascial half-cylinder that links 
the oral and nasal cavities in the head to the larynx and 
esophagus in the neck (Fig. 8.198). The pharyngeal cavity 
is a common pathway for air and food.
The pharynx is attached above to the base of the skull 
and is continuous below, approximately at the level of ver­
tebra CVI, with the top of the esophagus. The walls of the 
pharynx are attached anteriorly to the margins of the nasal 
cavities, oral cavity, and larynx. Based on these anterior 
relationships the pharynx is subdivided into three regions, 
the nasopharynx, oropharynx, and laryngopharynx:
■	 The posterior apertures (choanae) of the nasal cavities 
open into the nasopharynx.
Fig. 8.198  Pharynx. 
Choanae
Nasopharynx
Oropharynx
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Laryngopharynx
Laryngeal inlet
Pharyngeal
isthmus
Vertebral level CVI
Esophagus
Trachea
Larynx
Oral
cavity
Nasal cavities
Soft palate
■	 Firm multinodular large-volume rubbery nodes often 
suggest a diagnosis of lymphoma.
Examination should also include careful assessment of 
other nodal regions, including the supraclavicular fossae, the 
axillae, the retroperitoneum, and the inguinal regions.
Further examination may include digestive tract 
endoscopy, chest radiography, and body CT scanning.
Most cervical lymph nodes are easily palpable and 
suitable for biopsy to establish a tissue diagnosis. Biopsy can 
be performed using ultrasound for guidance and good 
samples of lymph nodes may be obtained.
The lymphatic drainage of the neck is somewhat 
complex, clinically. A relatively simple “level” system of 
nodal enlargement has been designed that is extremely 
helpful in evaluating lymph node spread of primary head 
and neck tumors. Once the number of levels of nodes are 
determined, and the size of the lymph nodes, the best 
mode of treatment can be instituted. This may include 
surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy. The lymph node 
level also enables a prognosis to be made. The levels are as 
follows (Fig. 8.199):
■	 Level I—from the midline of the submental triangle up to 
the level of the submandibular gland.
■	 Level II—from the skull base to the level of the hyoid 
bone anteriorly from the posterior border of the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle.
■	 Level III—the inferior aspect of the hyoid bone to the 
bottom cricoid arch and anterior to the posterior border 
of the sternocleidomastoid up to the midline.
■	 Level IV—from the inferior aspect of the cricoid to the 
top of the manubrium of the sternum and anterior to the 
posterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
■	 Level V—posterior to the sternocleidomastoid muscle 
and anterior to the trapezius muscle above the level of 
the clavicle.
■	 Level VI—below the hyoid bone and above the jugular 
(sternal) notch in the midline.
■	 Level VII—below the level of the jugular (sternal) notch.
In the clinic—cont’d
Fig. 8.199  Neck regions (levels) that are used clinically to 
evaluate lymph nodes. 
IV
V
III
II
I
VI
VII

=== PAGE 1057 ===
Head and Neck
1030
■	 swing down (depress) to close the oropharyngeal 
isthmus and seal off the oral cavity from the 
oropharynx.
Skeletal framework
The superior and anterior margins of the pharyngeal wall 
are attached to bone and cartilage, and to ligaments. The 
two sides of the pharyngeal wall are welded together pos­
teriorly in the midline by a vertically oriented cord-like 
ligament (the pharyngeal raphe). This connective tissue 
structure descends from the pharyngeal tubercle on the 
base of the skull to the level of cervical vertebra CVI where 
the raphe blends with connective tissue in the posterior 
wall of the esophagus.
There is an irregular C-shaped line of pharyngeal wall 
attachment on the base of the skull (Fig. 8.200). The open 
part of the C faces the nasal cavities. Each arm of the C 
begins at the posterior margin of the medial plate of the 
pterygoid process of the sphenoid bone, just inferior to the 
cartilaginous part of the pharyngotympanic tube. The line 
crosses inferior to the pharyngotympanic tube and then 
■	 The posterior opening of the oral cavity (oropharyngeal 
isthmus) opens into the oropharynx.
■	 The superior aperture of the larynx (laryngeal inlet) 
opens into the laryngopharynx.
In addition to these openings, the pharyngeal cavity 
is related anteriorly to the posterior one-third of the 
tongue and to the posterior aspect of the larynx. The 
pharyngotympanic tubes open into the lateral walls of the 
nasopharynx.
Lingual, pharyngeal, and palatine tonsils are on the 
deep surface of the pharyngeal walls.
The pharynx is separated from the posteriorly positioned 
vertebral column by a thin retropharyngeal space contain­
ing loose connective tissue.
Although the soft palate is generally considered as part 
of the roof of the oral cavity, it is also related to the pharynx. 
The soft palate is attached to the posterior margin of the 
hard palate and is a type of “flutter valve” that can:
■	 swing up (elevate) to close the pharyngeal isthmus, and 
seal off the nasopharynx from the oropharynx, and
Fig. 8.200  Line of attachment of the pharynx to the base of the skull. 
Cartilaginous position of 
pharyngotympanic tube
Choanae (posterior openings 
of nasal cavities)
Pterygoid hamulus
Line of attachment of pharynx
Roughening on petrous part
 of temporal bone for
 attachment of levator
 veli palatini
External acoustic meatus
Pharyngeal tubercle
Jugular foramen
Carotid canal
Medial plate of pterygoid
 process of sphenoid
Petrous part of temporal bone
Scaphoid fossa on sphenoid
 bone (for attachment
 of tensor veli palatini)

=== PAGE 1058 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pharynx
8
1031
mandible. It joins a muscle of the lateral pharyngeal wall 
(superior constrictor) with a muscle of the lateral wall of 
the oral cavity (buccinator).
Second part
The second part of the line of attachment of the lateral 
pharyngeal wall is related to the hyoid bone. It begins on 
the lower aspect of the stylohyoid ligament, which con­
nects the tip of the styloid process of the temporal bone to 
the lesser horn of the hyoid bone. The line continues 
onto the lesser horn and then turns and runs posteriorly 
along the entire upper surface of the greater horn of the 
hyoid where it terminates.
Third part
The most inferior and third part of the line of attachment 
of the lateral pharyngeal wall begins superiorly on the 
superior tubercle of the thyroid cartilage, and descends 
along the oblique line to the inferior tubercle.
From the inferior tubercle, the line of attachment con­
tinues over the cricothyroid muscle along a tendinous 
thickening of fascia to the cricoid cartilage where it 
terminates.
Pharyngeal wall
The pharyngeal wall is formed by skeletal muscles and by 
fascia. Gaps between the muscles are reinforced by the 
fascia and provide routes for structures to pass through 
the wall.
Muscles
The muscles of the pharynx are organized into two groups 
based on the orientation of muscle fibers.
The constrictor muscles have fibers oriented in a circular 
direction relative to the pharyngeal wall, whereas the 
longitudinal muscles have fibers oriented vertically.
Constrictor muscles
The three constrictor muscles on each side are major con­
tributors to the structure of the pharyngeal wall (Fig. 8.202 
and Table 8.17) and their names indicate their position—
superior, middle, and inferior constrictor muscles. 
Posteriorly, the muscles from each side are joined together 
by the pharyngeal raphe. Anteriorly, these muscles attach 
to bones, cartilages, and ligaments related to the lateral 
margins of the nasal and oral cavities and the larynx.
The constrictor muscles overlap each other in a fashion 
resembling the walls of three flower pots stacked one on 
the other. The inferior constrictors overlap the lower 
margins of the middle constrictors and, in the same way, 
the middle constrictors overlap the superior constrictors.
passes onto the petrous part of the temporal bone where it 
is just medial to the roughening for the attachment of one 
of the muscles (levator veli palatini) of the soft palate. From 
here, the line swings medially onto the occipital bone and 
joins the line from the other side at a prominent elevation 
of bone in the midline (the pharyngeal tubercle).
Anterior vertical line of attachment for 
the lateral pharyngeal walls
The vertical line of attachment for the lateral pharyngeal 
walls to structures related to the nasal and oral cavities and 
larynx is discontinuous and in three parts (Fig. 8.201).
First part
On each side, the anterior line of attachment of the lateral 
pharyngeal wall begins superiorly on the posterior edge of 
the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone just inferior 
to where the pharyngotympanic tube lies against this plate. 
It continues inferiorly along the edge of the medial plate of 
the pterygoid process and onto the pterygoid hamulus. 
From this point, the line descends along the pterygoman­
dibular raphe to the mandible where this part of the line 
terminates.
The pterygomandibular raphe is a linear cord-like 
connective tissue ligament that spans the distance between 
the tip of the pterygoid hamulus and a triangular roughen­
ing immediately posterior to the third molar on the 
Fig. 8.201  Attachments of the lateral pharyngeal wall. 
Medial plate
of pterygoid  process
Pharyngotympanic tube
Pharyngeal tubercle
Styloid
process
Pterygoid hamulus
Pharyngeal
raphe
Retro-
pharyngeal
space
Esophagus
Cricothyroid muscle
Cricoid cartilage
Oblique line
Stylohyoid ligament
Pterygomandibular
raphe
CVI

=== PAGE 1059 ===
Head and Neck
1032
Fig. 8.202  Constrictor muscles of the pharynx. A. Lateral view. B. Posterior view. 
A
B
Position of palatopharyngeal sphincter
on deep surface of superior constrictor
Superior constrictor
Middle constrictor
Inferior constrictor
Esophagus
Pharyngeal 
tubercle
Pharyngeal fascia
Stylohyoid 
ligament
Stylopharyngeus 
muscle
Pharyngeal
 raphe
Styloid 
process
Table 8.17  Constrictor muscles of the pharynx
Muscle
Posterior attachment
Anterior attachment
Innervation
Function
Superior constrictor
Pharyngeal raphe
Pterygomandibular raphe and adjacent bone 
on the mandible and pterygoid hamulus
Vagus nerve [X]
Constriction of pharynx
Middle constrictor
Pharyngeal raphe
Upper margin of greater horn of hyoid bone 
and adjacent margins of lesser horn and 
stylohyoid ligament
Vagus nerve [X]
Constriction of pharynx
Inferior constrictor
Pharyngeal raphe
Cricoid cartilage, oblique line of thyroid 
cartilage, and a ligament that spans between 
these attachments and crosses the 
cricothyroid muscle
Vagus nerve [X]
Constriction of pharynx
Collectively, the muscles constrict or narrow the pha­
ryngeal cavity.
When the constrictor muscles contract sequentially 
from top to bottom, as in swallowing, they move a bolus of 
food through the pharynx and into the esophagus.
All of the constrictors are innervated by the pharyngeal 
branch of the vagus nerve [X].
Superior constrictors
The superior constrictor muscles together bracket the 
upper part of the pharyngeal cavity (Fig. 8.202).
Each muscle is attached anteriorly to the pterygoid 
hamulus, pterygomandibular raphe, and adjacent bone of 
the mandible. From these attachments, the muscle fans out 
posteriorly and joins with its partner muscle from the other 
side at the pharyngeal raphe.
A special band of muscle (the palatopharyngeal 
sphincter) originates from the anterolateral surface of 
the soft palate and circles the inner aspect of the pharyn­
geal wall, blending with the inner aspect of the superior 
constrictor.

=== PAGE 1062 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pharynx
8
1035
(Fig. 8.204). This triangular-shaped gap (oropharyngeal 
triangle) not only enables the stylopharyngeus to slip into 
the pharyngeal wall, but also allows muscles, nerves, and 
vessels to pass between regions lateral to the pharyngeal 
wall and the oral cavity, particularly to the tongue.
The gap between the middle and inferior constrictor 
muscles allows the internal laryngeal vessels and nerve 
access to the aperture in the thyrohyoid membrane to enter 
the larynx.
The recurrent laryngeal nerves and accompanying 
inferior laryngeal vessels enter the larynx posterior to the 
inferior horn of the thyroid cartilage deep to the inferior 
margin of the inferior constrictor muscle.
Nasopharynx
The nasopharynx is behind the posterior apertures 
(choanae) of the nasal cavities and above the level of the 
soft palate (Fig. 8.205). Its ceiling is formed by the sloping 
base of the skull and consists of the posterior part of the 
body of the sphenoid bone and the basal part of the occipi­
tal bone. The ceiling and lateral walls of the nasopharynx 
form a domed vault at the top of the pharyngeal cavity that 
is always open.
The cavity of the nasopharynx is continuous below 
with the cavity of the oropharynx at the pharyngeal 
isthmus. The position of the pharyngeal isthmus is marked 
on the pharyngeal wall by a mucosal fold caused by the 
underlying palatopharyngeal sphincter, which is part of 
the superior constrictor muscle.
Elevation of the soft palate and constriction of the pala­
topharyngeal sphincter closes the pharyngeal isthmus 
during swallowing and separates the nasopharynx from 
the oropharynx.
There is a large collection of lymphoid tissue (the pha­
ryngeal tonsil) in the mucosa covering the roof of the 
nasopharynx. Enlargement of this tonsil, known then as 
adenoids, can occlude the nasopharynx so that breathing 
is only possible through the oral cavity (Fig. 8.205A).
The most prominent features on each lateral wall of the 
nasopharynx are:
■	 the pharyngeal opening of the pharyngotympanic tube, 
and
■	 mucosal elevations and folds covering the end of the 
pharyngotympanic tube and the adjacent muscles.
The opening of the pharyngotympanic tube is posterior 
to and slightly above the level of the hard palate, and lateral 
to the top of the soft palate (Fig. 8.205A).
Because the pharyngotympanic tube projects into the 
nasopharynx from a posterolateral direction, its posterior 
Gaps in the pharyngeal wall and structures 
passing through them
Gaps between muscles of the pharyngeal wall provide 
important routes for muscles and neurovascular tissues 
(Fig. 8.204).
Above the margin of the superior constrictor, the pha­
ryngeal wall is deficient in muscle and completed by pha­
ryngeal fascia.
The tensor and levator veli palatini muscles of the soft 
palate initially descend from the base of the skull and are 
lateral to the pharyngeal fascia. In this position, they 
reinforce the pharyngeal wall:
■	 The levator veli palatini passes through the pharyngeal 
fascia inferior to the pharyngotympanic tube and 
enters the soft palate.
■	 The tendon of the tensor veli palatini turns medially 
around the pterygoid hamulus and passes through the 
origin of the buccinator muscle to enter the soft palate.
One of the largest and most important apertures in the 
pharyngeal wall is between the superior and middle con­
strictor muscles of the pharynx and the posterior border of 
the mylohyoid muscle, which forms the floor of the mouth 
Fig. 8.204  Gaps between muscles in the pharyngeal wall. 
Pharyngeal fascia
Stylopharyngeus
Superior constrictor
Middle constrictor
Inferior constrictor
Oropharyngeal
triangle:
structures (muscles,
nerves, vessels)
passing into and out
of the oral cavity
Internal laryngeal
nerve and vessels
Esophagus
Recurrent laryngeal
nerve and vessels
Trachea
Mylohyoid
Buccinator

=== PAGE 1066 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pharynx
8
1039
the nasopharynx and vertebral column), paratracheal, 
and infrahyoid nodes (Fig. 8.207).
The palatine tonsils drain through the pharyngeal wall 
into the jugulodigastric nodes in the region where the 
facial vein drains into the internal jugular vein (and infe­
rior to the posterior belly of the digastric muscle).
Veins
Veins of the pharynx form a plexus, which drains superi­
orly into the pterygoid plexus in the infratemporal fossa, 
and inferiorly into the facial and internal jugular veins 
(Fig. 8.207).
Lymphatics
Lymphatic vessels from the pharynx drain into the deep 
cervical nodes and include retropharyngeal (between 
Fig. 8.207  Venous and lymphatic drainage of the pharynx. 
Jugulodigastric node
Pterygoid plexus
Superficial temporal vein
Retropharyngeal nodes
Internal jugular vein
Paratracheal nodes
External jugular vein
Subclavian vein
Retromandibular vein
Left jugular trunk
Infrahyoid nodes
Facial vein
Retromandibular vein

=== PAGE 1082 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Larynx
8
1055
laryngeal nerve through the thyrohyoid membrane to 
reach the larynx.
■	 The inferior laryngeal artery originates from the 
inferior thyroid branch of the thyrocervical trunk of the 
subclavian artery low in the neck and, together with 
the recurrent laryngeal nerve, ascends in the groove 
between the esophagus and trachea—it enters the 
larynx by passing deep to the margin of the inferior 
constrictor muscle of the pharynx.
Vessels
Arteries
The major blood supply to the larynx is by the superior and 
inferior laryngeal arteries (Fig. 8.226):
■	 The superior laryngeal artery originates near the 
upper margin of the thyroid cartilage from the superior 
thyroid branch of the external carotid artery, and 
accompanies the internal branch of the superior 
Fig. 8.226  Arterial supply of the larynx, left lateral view. 
External carotid artery
Superior thyroid artery
Superior laryngeal artery
Thyrohyoid membrane
Thyroid cartilage
Cricoid cartilage
Trachea
Rib I
Scalene tubercle on rib I
Subclavian artery
Thyrocervical trunk
Inferior thyroid artery
Inferior laryngeal artery
Esophagus
Inferior constrictor muscle
of pharynx
Common carotid artery
Internal carotid artery

=== PAGE 1093 ===
Head and Neck
1066
Anterior to the cribriform plate the roof slopes inferiorly 
to the nares and is formed by:
■	 the nasal spine of the frontal bone and the nasal 
bones, and
■	 the lateral processes of the septal cartilage and major 
alar cartilages of the external nose.
Posteriorly, the roof of each cavity slopes inferiorly to 
the choana and is formed by:
■	 the anterior surface of the sphenoid bone,
■	 the ala of the vomer and adjacent sphenoidal process 
of the palatine bone, and
■	 the vaginal process of the medial plate of the pterygoid 
process.
Underlying the mucosa, the roof is perforated superiorly 
by openings in the cribriform plate, and anterior to these 
openings by a separate foramen for the anterior ethmoidal 
nerve and vessels.
The opening between the sphenoidal sinus and the 
spheno-ethmoidal recess is on the posterior slope of 
the roof.
Lateral wall
The lateral wall of each nasal cavity is complex and is 
formed by bone, cartilage, and soft tissues.
In the clinic
Deviated nasal septum
The nasal septum is typically situated in the midline; 
however, septal deviation to one side or the other is not 
uncommon, and in many cases is secondary to direct 
trauma. Extreme septal deviation can produce nasal 
occlusion. The deviation can be corrected surgically.
Fig. 8.237  Floor of the nasal cavity (superior view). 
Septal
 cartilage
Naris
Anterior nasal spine
Incisive canal
Palatine process 
of maxilla
Horizontal plate 
of palatine
Soft palate
Nasal crests
Maxillary
 sinus
Fig. 8.238  Roof of the nasal cavity. 
Cribriform plate
Opening of sphenoidal sinus
Ala of vomer
Vomer
Sphenoidal rostrum
(articulates in the
midline with the vomer)
Nasal bones
Nasal spine of frontal bone
Floor
The floor of each nasal cavity (Fig. 8.237) is smooth, 
concave, and much wider than the roof. It consists of:
■	 soft tissues of the external nose, and
■	 the upper surface of the palatine process of the maxilla 
and the horizontal plate of the palatine bone, which 
together form the hard palate.
The naris opens anteriorly into the floor, and the supe­
rior aperture of the incisive canal is deep to the mucosa 
immediately lateral to the nasal septum near the front of 
the hard palate.
Roof
The roof of the nasal cavity is narrow and is highest in 
central regions where it is formed by the cribriform plate 
of the ethmoid bone (Fig. 8.238).

=== PAGE 1094 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Nasal Cavities
8
1067
by the underlying middle ethmoidal cells, which expand 
the medial wall of the ethmoidal labyrinth.
Inferior to the ethmoidal bulla is a curved gutter 
(the semilunar hiatus), which is formed by the mucosa 
covering the lateral wall as it spans a defect in the bony wall 
between the ethmoidal bulla above and the uncinate 
process below.
The anterior end of the semilunar hiatus forms a 
channel (the ethmoidal infundibulum), which curves 
upward and continues as the frontonasal duct through the 
anterior part of the ethmoidal labyrinth to open into the 
frontal sinus.
The nasolacrimal duct and most of the paranasal sinuses 
open onto the lateral wall of the nasal cavity (Fig. 8.239C):
■	 The nasolacrimal duct opens onto the lateral wall of the 
inferior nasal meatus under the anterior lip of the 
inferior concha—it drains tears from the conjunctival 
sac of the eye into the nasal cavity and originates at the 
inferior end of the lacrimal sac on the anteromedial wall 
of the orbit.
■	 The frontal sinus drains via the frontonasal duct and 
ethmoidal infundibulum into the anterior end of the 
semilunar hiatus on the lateral wall of the middle nasal 
meatus—the anterior ethmoidal cells drain into the 
frontonasal duct or ethmoidal infundibulum (in some 
cases, the frontal sinus drains directly into the anterior 
Bony support for the lateral wall (Fig. 8.239A) is pro­
vided by:
■	 the ethmoidal labyrinth, superior concha, middle 
concha and uncinate process,
■	 the perpendicular plate of the palatine bone,
■	 the medial pterygoid plate of the sphenoid bone,
■	 the medial surfaces of the lacrimal bones and maxillae, 
and
■	 the inferior concha.
In the external nose, the lateral wall of the cavity is 
supported by cartilage (lateral process of the septal carti­
lage and major and minor alar cartilages) and by soft 
tissues. The surface of the lateral wall is irregular in 
contour and is interrupted by the three nasal conchae.
The inferior, middle, and superior conchae (Fig. 8.239B) 
extend medially across the nasal cavity, separating it into 
four air channels, an inferior, middle, and superior meatus 
and a spheno-ethmoidal recess. The conchae do not extend 
forward into the external nose. The anterior end of each 
concha curves inferiorly to form a lip that overlies the end 
of the related meatus.
Immediately inferior to the attachment of the middle 
concha and just anterior to the midpoint of the concha, 
the lateral wall of the middle meatus elevates to form the 
dome-shaped ethmoidal bulla (Fig. 8.239C). This is formed 
A
Frontal process of maxilla
Superior concha
Middle concha
Medial pterygoid plate of
sphenoid bone
Uncinate process of ethmoid
Perpendicular plate
of palatine bone
Inferior concha
Minor alar cartilage
Major alar cartilage
Lateral process of
septal cartilage
Lacrimal bone
Nasal bone
Fig. 8.239  Lateral wall of the nasal cavity. A. Bones. 
Continued

=== PAGE 1097 ===
Head and Neck
1070
Fig. 8.241  Choanae (posterior view). A. Overview. B. Magnified view. 
Ala of vomer
Sphenoidal rostrum
Sphenoidal process
 of palatine bone
Palatine bone
Maxilla
Palatovaginal canal
Vomer
B
A
Vomer
Sphenoid bone
Medial pterygoid
plate of sphenoid
Horizontal plate 
of palatine bone
Pyramidal process 
of palatine bone
Oral cavity
Choanae
Choanae
Vaginal process of medial pterygoid plate
facial expression (nasalis, depressor septi nasi, and levator 
labii superioris alaeque nasi muscles; Fig. 8.240B).
Choanae
The choanae are the oval-shaped openings between the 
nasal cavities and the nasopharynx (Fig. 8.241). Unlike 
the nares, which have flexible borders of cartilage and soft 
tissues, the choanae are rigid openings completely sur­
rounded by bone, and their margins are formed:
■	 inferiorly by the posterior border of the horizontal plate 
of the palatine bone,
■	 laterally by the posterior margin of the medial plate of 
the pterygoid process, and
■	 medially by the posterior border of the vomer.
The roof of the choanae is formed:
■	 anteriorly by the ala of the vomer and the vaginal 
process of the medial plate of the pterygoid process, and
■	 posteriorly by the body of the sphenoid bone.

=== PAGE 1100 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Nasal Cavities
8
1073
Superior labial and lateral nasal arteries
The superior labial artery and the lateral nasal artery 
originate from the facial artery on the front of the face.
The superior labial artery originates from the facial 
artery near the lateral end of the oral fissure and passes 
medially in the lip, supplying the lip and giving rise to 
branches that supply the nose and nasal cavity. An alar 
branch supplies the region around the lateral aspect of the 
naris and a septal branch passes into the nasal cavity and 
supplies anterior regions of the nasal septum.
The lateral nasal artery originates from the facial 
artery in association with the margin of the external nose 
and contributes to the blood supply of the external nose. 
Alar branches pass around the lateral margin of the naris 
and supply the nasal vestibule.
Anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries
The anterior and posterior ethmoidal arteries (Fig. 8.243) 
originate in the orbit from the ophthalmic artery, which 
originates in the cranial cavity as a major branch of the 
internal carotid artery. They pass through canals in the 
medial wall of the orbit between the ethmoidal labyrinth 
and frontal bone, supply the adjacent paranasal sinuses, 
and then enter the cranial cavity immediately lateral and 
superior to the cribriform plate.
The posterior ethmoidal artery descends into the 
nasal cavity through the cribriform plate and has branches 
to the upper parts of the medial and lateral walls.
The anterior ethmoidal artery passes forward, with 
the accompanying anterior ethmoidal nerve, in a groove 
on the cribriform plate and enters the nasal cavity by 
descending through a slit-like foramen immediately lateral 
to the crista galli. It gives rise to branches that supply the 
medial (septal) and lateral wall of the nasal cavity and then 
continues forward on the deep surface of the nasal bone, 
and terminates by passing between the nasal bone and 
lateral nasal cartilage to emerge on the external nose as 
the external nasal branch to supply skin and adjacent 
tissues.
Vessels that supply the nasal cavities form extensive 
anastomoses with each other. This is particularly evident 
in the anterior region of the medial wall where there are 
anastomoses between branches of the greater palatine, 
sphenopalatine, superior labial, and anterior ethmoidal 
arteries, and where the vessels are relatively close to the 
surface (Fig. 8.243B). This area is the major site of nose­
bleeds, or epistaxis.
Veins
Veins draining the nasal cavities generally follow the arter­
ies (Fig. 8.244):
Fig. 8.244  Venous drainage of the nasal cavities. 
Nasal vein in foramen cecum
Drainage to cavernous
sinus in cranial cavity
Drainage to pterygoid plexus
in infratemporal fossa
Drainage to facial vein
■	 Veins that pass with branches that ultimately originate 
from the maxillary artery drain into the pterygoid 
plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa.
■	 Veins from anterior regions of the nasal cavities join the 
facial vein.
In some individuals, an additional nasal vein passes 
superiorly through a midline aperture (the foramen 
cecum), in the frontal bone anterior to the crista galli, 
and joins with the anterior end of the superior sagittal 
sinus. Because this nasal vein connects an intracranial 
venous sinus with extracranial veins, it is classified as an 
emissary vein. Emissary veins in general are routes by 
which infections can track from peripheral regions into the 
cranial cavity.
Veins that accompany the anterior and posterior 
ethmoidal arteries are tributaries of the superior ophthal­
mic vein, which is one of the largest emissary veins and 
drains into the cavernous sinus on either side of the 
hypophyseal fossa.

=== PAGE 1103 ===
Head and Neck
1076
Fig. 8.247  Oral cavity. A. Relationship to other cavities. B. Oral vestibule and oral cavity proper. 
Roof 
(hard palate)
A
B
Soft palate
Nasal cavities
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Pharyngeal
isthmus
Pharynx
Oropharynx
Floor
(tongue and other
soft tissues)
Esophagus
Trachea
Oral cavity
Larynx
Oral
fissure
Lateral wall
(cheek)
Soft palate
Oral vestibule
Oral fissure
Oral cavity proper
Oropharyngeal
isthmus
Lymph from posterior regions of the nasal cavity and 
the paranasal sinuses drains into upper deep cervical 
nodes. Some of this lymph passes first through the retro­
pharyngeal nodes.
ORAL CAVITY
The oral cavity is inferior to the nasal cavities (Fig. 8.247A). 
It has a roof and floor and lateral walls, opens onto the face 
through the oral fissure, and is continuous with the cavity 
of the pharynx at the oropharyngeal isthmus.
The roof of the oral cavity consists of the hard and soft 
palates. The floor is formed mainly of soft tissues, which 
include a muscular diaphragm and the tongue. The lateral 
walls (cheeks) are muscular and merge anteriorly with the 
lips surrounding the oral fissure (the anterior opening of 
the oral cavity).
The posterior aperture of the oral cavity is the oropha­
ryngeal isthmus, which opens into the oral part of the 
pharynx.
The oral cavity is separated into two regions by the 
upper and lower dental arches consisting of the teeth and 
alveolar bone that supports them (Fig. 8.247B):
■	 The outer oral vestibule, which is horseshoe shaped, 
is between the dental arches and the deep surfaces of 
the cheeks and lips—the oral fissure opens into it and 
can be opened and closed by muscles of facial expres­
sion, and by movements of the lower jaw.
■	 The inner oral cavity proper is enclosed by the dental 
arches.
The degree of separation between the upper and lower 
arches is established by elevating or depressing the lower 
jaw (mandible) at the temporomandibular joint.
The oropharyngeal isthmus at the back of the oral 
cavity proper can be opened and closed by surrounding soft 
tissues, which include the soft palate and tongue.
The oral cavity has multiple functions:
■	 It is the inlet for the digestive system involved with the 
initial processing of food, which is aided by secretions 
from salivary glands.
■	 It manipulates sounds produced by the larynx and one 
outcome of this is speech.
It can be used for breathing because it opens into the 
pharynx, which is a common pathway for food and air. For 
this reason, the oral cavity can be used by physicians to 
access the lower airway, and dentists use “rubber dams” to 
prevent debris such as tooth fragments from passing 
through the oropharyngeal isthmus and pharynx into 
either the esophagus or the lower airway.

=== PAGE 1104 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1077
The palatine process is a horizontal shelf that projects 
from the medial surface of each maxilla. It originates just 
superior to the medial aspect of the alveolar process and 
extends to the midline where it is joined, at a suture, with 
the palatine process from the other side. Together, the two 
palatine processes form the anterior two-thirds of the hard 
palate.
In the midline on the inferior surface of the hard palate 
and at the anterior end of the intermaxillary suture is a 
single small fossa (incisive fossa) just behind the incisor 
teeth. Two incisive canals, one on each side, extend pos­
terosuperiorly from the roof of this fossa to open onto the 
floor of the nasal cavity. The canals and fossae allow 
passage of the greater palatine vessels and the nasopalatine 
nerves.
Palatine bones
The parts of each L-shaped palatine bone that contribute 
to the roof of the oral cavity are the horizontal plate and 
the pyramidal process (Fig. 8.248A).
The horizontal plate projects medially from the inferior 
aspect of the palatine bone and is joined by sutures to its 
partner in the midline and, on the same side, with the pala­
tine process of the maxilla anteriorly.
A single posterior nasal spine is formed at the midline 
where the two horizontal plates join and projects backward 
from the margin of the hard palate. The posterior margin 
of the horizontal plates and the posterior nasal spine are 
associated with attachment of the soft palate.
The greater palatine foramen, formed mainly by the 
horizontal plate of the palatine bone and completed 
laterally by the adjacent part of the maxilla, opens onto 
the posterolateral aspect of the horizontal plate. This 
foramen is the inferior opening of the palatine canal, 
which continues superiorly into the pterygopalatine fossa 
and transmits the greater palatine nerve and vessels to 
the palate.
Also opening onto the palatine bone is the lesser palatine 
foramen. This foramen is the inferior opening of the short 
lesser palatine canal, which branches from the greater 
palatine canal and transmits the lesser palatine nerve and 
vessels to the soft palate.
The pyramidal process projects posteriorly and fills 
the space between the inferior ends of the medial and 
lateral plates of the pterygoid process of the sphenoid 
bone.
Sphenoid bone
The pterygoid processes and spines of the sphenoid 
bone are associated with structures related to the soft 
palate, which forms part of the roof of the oral cavity 
(Fig. 8.248A).
Multiple nerves innervate the oral cavity
General sensory innervation is carried predominantly by 
branches of the trigeminal nerve [V]:
■	 The upper parts of the cavity, including the palate and 
the upper teeth, are innervated by branches of the 
maxillary nerve [V2].
■	 The lower parts, including the teeth and oral part of the 
tongue, are innervated by branches of the mandibular 
nerve [V3].
■	 Taste (special afferent [SA]) from the oral part or ante­
rior two-thirds of the tongue is carried by branches of 
the facial nerve [VII], which join and are distributed 
with branches of the trigeminal nerve [V].
■	 Parasympathetic fibers to the glands within the oral 
cavity are also carried by branches of the facial nerve 
[VII], which are distributed with branches of the tri­
geminal nerve [V].
■	 Sympathetic fibers in the oral cavity ultimately come 
from spinal cord level T1, synapse in the superior cervi­
cal sympathetic ganglion, and are eventually distributed 
to the oral cavity along branches of the trigeminal nerve 
[V] or directly along blood vessels.
All muscles of the tongue are innervated by the hypo­
glossal nerve [XII], except the palatoglossus, which is 
innervated by the vagus nerve [X].
All muscles of the soft palate are innervated by the 
vagus nerve [X], except for the tensor veli palatini, which 
is innervated by a branch from the mandibular nerve [V3]. 
The muscle (mylohyoid) that forms the floor of the oral 
cavity is also innervated by the mandibular nerve [V3].
Skeletal framework
Bones that contribute to the skeletal framework of the oral 
cavity or are related to the anatomy of structures in the 
oral cavity include:
■	 the paired maxillae, palatine, and temporal bones, and
■	 the unpaired mandible, sphenoid, and hyoid bones.
In addition, the cartilaginous parts of the pharyngo­
tympanic tubes on the inferior aspect of the base of the 
skull are related to the attachment of muscles of the 
soft palate.
Maxillae
The two maxillae contribute substantially to the architec­
ture of the roof of the oral cavity. The parts involved are 
the alveolar and palatine processes (Fig. 8.248A).

=== PAGE 1105 ===
Head and Neck
1078
Fig. 8.248  Base and lateral aspects of the skull. A. Features in the base of the skull related to structures associated with the oral cavity. 
B. Styloid process of the temporal bone. 
Petrous part of 
temporal bone
Scaphoid fossa
Foramen ovale
Spine of sphenoid
Opening to bony part
of pharyngotympanic tube
Foramen spinosum
Carotid canal
Styloid process of 
temporal bone
Mastoid process
Stylomastoid foramen
Jugular foramen
Roughening for attachment of levator veli palatini
Foramen lacerum (closed by cartilage)
Cartilaginous part of pharyngotympanic tube
Greater wing of sphenoid
Membranous lamina of
cartilaginous part
 of pharyngotympanic tube
A
Incisive fossa
Palatine process of maxilla
Alveolar process of maxilla
Horizontal plate of palatine bone
Greater palatine foramen
Lesser palatine foramen
Lateral plate of 
pterygoid process
Medial plate of 
pterygoid process
Intermaxillary suture
Posterior nasal spine
Pyramidal process of palatine bone
Pterygoid hamulus
Styloid process
of temporal bone
Stylohyoid ligament
Lesser horn
of hyoid bone
B

=== PAGE 1106 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1079
Cartilaginous part of the pharyngotympanic tube
The trumpet-shaped cartilaginous part of the pharyngo­
tympanic tube is in a groove between the anterior 
margin of the petrous part of the temporal bone and 
the posterior margin of the greater wing of the sphenoid 
(Fig. 8.248A).
The medial and lateral walls of the cartilaginous part of 
the pharyngotympanic tube are formed mainly of carti­
lage, whereas the more inferolateral wall is more fibrous 
and is known as the membranous lamina.
The apex of the cartilaginous part of the pharyngotym­
panic tube connects laterally to the opening of the bony 
part in the temporal bone.
The expanded medial end of the cartilaginous part of 
the pharyngotympanic tube is immediately posterior to the 
upper margin of the medial plate of the pterygoid process 
and opens into the nasopharynx.
The cartilaginous part of the pharyngotympanic tube is 
lateral to the attachment of the levator veli palatini muscle 
and medial to the spine of the sphenoid. The tensor veli 
palatini muscle is attached, in part, to the membranous 
lamina.
Mandible
The mandible is the bone of the lower jaw (Fig. 8.249). It 
consists of a body of right and left parts, which are fused 
anteriorly in the midline (mandibular symphysis), and 
two rami. The site of fusion is particularly visible on the 
external surface of the bone as a small vertical ridge in the 
midline.
The upper surface of the body of the mandible bears the 
alveolar arch (Fig. 8.249B), which anchors the lower teeth, 
and on its external surface on each side is a small mental 
foramen (Fig. 8.249B).
Posterior to the mandibular symphysis on the internal 
surface of the mandible are two pairs of small spines, one 
pair immediately above the other pair. These are the supe­
rior and inferior mental spines (superior and inferior 
genial spines) (Fig. 8.249A,C), and are attachment sites 
for a pair of muscles that pass into the tongue and a pair 
of muscles that connect the mandible to the hyoid bone.
Extending from the midline and originating inferior to 
the mental spines is a raised line or ridge (the mylohyoid 
line) (Fig. 8.249C), which runs posteriorly and superiorly 
along the internal surface of each side of the body of the 
mandible to end just below the level of the last molar tooth.
Above the anterior one-third of the mylohyoid line is a 
shallow depression (the sublingual fossa) (Fig. 8.249C), 
and below the posterior two-thirds of the mylohyoid 
line is another depression (the submandibular fossa) 
(Fig. 8.249C).
The pterygoid processes descend, one on each side, from 
the lateral aspect of the body of the sphenoid bone. Each 
process has a medial and a lateral plate. These two verti­
cally oriented plates project from the posterior aspect of the 
process. The V-shaped gap that occurs inferiorly between 
the two plates is filled by the pyramidal process of the pala­
tine bone.
Projecting posterolaterally from the inferior margin of 
the medial plate of the pterygoid process is an elongate 
hook-shaped structure (the pterygoid hamulus). This 
hamulus is immediately behind the alveolar arch and 
inferior to the posterior margin of the hard palate. It is:
■	 a “pulley” for one of the muscles (tensor veli palatini) of 
the soft palate, and
■	 the attachment site for the upper end of the pterygo­
mandibular raphe, which is attached below to the 
mandible and joins together the superior constrictor of 
the pharynx and the buccinator muscle of the cheek.
At the root of the medial plate of the pterygoid process 
on the base of the skull is a small canoe-shaped fossa 
(scaphoid fossa), which begins just medial to the foramen 
ovale and descends anteriorly and medially to the root of 
the medial plate of the pterygoid process (Fig. 8.248A). 
This fossa is for the attachment of one of the muscles of 
the soft palate (tensor veli palatini).
The spines of the sphenoid, one on each side, are verti­
cal projections from the inferior surfaces of the greater 
wings of the sphenoid bone (Fig. 8.248A). Each spine is 
immediately posteromedial to the foramen spinosum.
The medial aspect of the spine provides attachment for 
the most lateral part of the tensor veli palatini muscle of 
the soft palate.
Temporal bone
The styloid process and inferior aspect of the petrous part 
of the temporal bone provide attachment for muscles 
associated with the tongue and soft palate, respectively.
The styloid process projects anteroinferiorly from 
the underside of the temporal bone. It can be as long as 
1 inch (2.5 cm) and points toward the lesser horn of 
the hyoid bone to which it is attached by the stylohyoid 
ligament (Fig. 8.248B). The root of the styloid process is 
immediately anterior to the stylomastoid foramen and 
lateral to the jugular foramen. The styloglossus muscle of 
the tongue attaches to the anterolateral surface of the 
styloid process.
The inferior aspect of the temporal bone has a triangular 
roughened area immediately anteromedial to the opening 
of the carotid canal (Fig. 8.248A). The levator veli palatini 
muscle of the soft palate is attached here.

=== PAGE 1107 ===
Head and Neck
1080
Fig. 8.249  Mandible. A. Superior view. B. Lateral view. C. Medial 
view. 
A
B
C
Condylar
process
Ramus
Body
Angle
Alveolar arch
Coronoid process
Lingula
Retromolar triangle
Retromolar fossa
Submandibular fossa
Mandibular
foramen
Attachment for
pterygomandibular raphe
Mylohyoid line
Sublingual fossa
Superior
mental spine
Inferior
mental spine
Mental foramen
Shallow groove for
lingual nerve
Mandibular
symphysis
Retromolar triangle
Attachment for
pterygomandibular raphe
Superior
mental spines
Between the last molar tooth and the mylohyoid line is 
a shallow groove for the lingual nerve.
Immediately posterior to the last molar tooth on the 
medial upper surface of the body of the mandible is a 
small triangular depression (retromolar triangle) (Fig. 
8.249A,C). The pterygomandibular raphe attaches just 
medial to the apex of this triangle and extends from here 
to the tip of the pterygoid hamulus above.
The ramus of the mandible, one on each side, is quad­
rangular shaped and oriented in the sagittal plane. On the 
medial surface of the ramus is a large mandibular 
foramen for transmission of the inferior alveolar nerve 
and vessels (Fig. 8.249C).
Hyoid bone
The hyoid bone is a small U-shaped bone in the neck 
between the larynx and the mandible. It has an anterior 
body of hyoid bone and two large greater horns, one on 
each side, which project posteriorly and superiorly from the 
body (Fig. 8.250). There are two small conical lesser horns 
on the superior surface where the greater horns join with 
the body. The stylohyoid ligaments attach to the apices of 
the lesser horns.
The hyoid bone is a key bone in the neck because it 
connects the floor of the oral cavity in front with the 
pharynx behind and the larynx below.
Walls: the cheeks
The walls of the oral cavity are formed by the cheeks.
Each cheek consists of fascia and a layer of skeletal 
muscle sandwiched between skin externally and oral 
mucosa internally. The thin layer of skeletal muscle within 
the cheeks is principally the buccinator muscle.
Fig. 8.250  Hyoid bone. A. Anterior view. B. Lateral view. 
Greater horn
A
B
Lesser horn
Body
Stylohyoid ligament
Greater horn
Lesser horn
Body

=== PAGE 1108 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1081
The buccinator muscle, in addition to originating from 
the pterygomandibular raphe, also originates directly 
from the alveolar part of the mandible and alveolar 
process of the maxilla.
From its three sites of origin, the muscle fibers of the 
buccinator run forward to blend with those of the orbicu­
laris oris muscle and to insert into the modiolus, which is 
a small button-shaped nodule of connective tissue at the 
interface between the muscles of the lips and cheeks on 
each side.
The buccinator muscle holds the cheeks against the 
alveolar arches and keeps food between the teeth when 
chewing.
The buccinator is innervated by the buccal branch of 
the facial nerve [VII]. General sensation from the skin and 
oral mucosa of the cheeks is carried by the buccal branch 
of the mandibular nerve [V3].
Floor
The floor of the oral cavity proper is formed mainly by three 
structures:
■	 a muscular diaphragm, which fills the U-shaped gap 
between the left and right sides of the body of the man­
dible and is composed of the paired mylohyoid muscles;
■	 two cord-like geniohyoid muscles above the diaphragm, 
which run from the mandible in front to the hyoid bone 
behind; and
■	 the tongue, which is superior to the geniohyoid muscles.
Also present in the floor of the oral cavity proper are 
salivary glands and their ducts. The largest of these glands, 
on each side, are the sublingual gland and the oral part of 
the submandibular gland.
Mylohyoid muscles
The two thin mylohyoid muscles (Table 8.20), one on each 
side, together form a muscular diaphragm that defines the 
Buccinator
The buccinator muscle is one of the muscles of facial 
expression (Fig. 8.251). It is in the same plane as the 
superior constrictor muscle of the pharynx. In fact, the 
posterior margin of the buccinator muscle is joined to 
the anterior margin of the superior constrictor muscle by 
the pterygomandibular raphe, which runs between the tip 
of the pterygoid hamulus of the sphenoid bone above and a 
roughened area of bone immediately behind the last molar 
tooth on the mandible below.
The buccinator and superior constrictor muscles there­
fore provide continuity between the walls of the oral and 
pharyngeal cavities.
Fig. 8.251  Buccinator muscle. 
Attachment to maxilla
Superior constrictor
Pterygomandibular raphe
Attachment to mandible
Buccinator
Orbicularis oris
Modiolus
Table 8.20  Muscles in the floor of the oral cavity
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Mylohyoid
Mylohyoid line of mandible
Median fibrous raphe and 
adjacent part of hyoid bone
Nerve to mylohyoid from the 
inferior alveolar branch of 
mandibular nerve [V3]
Supports and elevates floor of 
oral cavity; depresses mandible 
when hyoid is fixed; elevates and 
pulls hyoid forward when 
mandible is fixed
Geniohyoid
Inferior mental spines of 
mandible
Body of hyoid bone
C1
Elevates and pulls hyoid bone 
forward; depresses mandible 
when hyoid is fixed

=== PAGE 1110 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1083
Gateway into the floor of the oral cavity
In addition to defining the lower limit of the floor of the 
oral cavity, the free posterior border of the mylohyoid 
muscle on each side forms one of the three margins of a 
large triangular aperture (oropharyngeal triangle), 
which is a major route by which structures in the upper 
neck and infratemporal fossa of the head pass to and from 
structures in the floor of the oral cavity (Fig. 8.253). The 
other two muscles that complete the margins of the aper­
ture are the superior and middle constrictor muscles of the 
pharynx.
Most structures that pass through the aperture are 
associated with the tongue and include muscles (hyoglos­
sus, styloglossus), vessels (lingual artery and vein), nerves 
(lingual, hypoglossal [XII], glossopharyngeal [IX]), and 
lymphatics.
superior to the mylohyoid muscles in the floor of the mouth 
and inferior to the genioglossus muscles that form part of 
the root of the tongue.
The geniohyoid muscles:
■	 mainly pull the hyoid bone, and therefore the attached 
larynx, up and forward during swallowing; and
■	 because they pass posteroinferiorly from the mandible 
to the hyoid bone, when the hyoid bone is fixed, they can 
act with the mylohyoid muscles to depress the mandible 
and open the mouth.
Unlike other muscles that move the mandible at the 
temporomandibular joint, the geniohyoid muscles are 
innervated by a branch of cervical nerve C1, which “hitch­
hikes” from the neck along the hypoglossal nerve [XII] into 
the floor of the oral cavity.
Fig. 8.253  Gateway into the floor of the oral cavity. 
Superior
constrictor
of pharynx
Middle
constrictor
of pharynx
Mylohyoid
Triangular aperture (oropharyngeal triangle) between mylohyoid,
superior constrictor, and middle constrictor

=== PAGE 1116 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1089
Vessels
Arteries
The major artery of the tongue is the lingual artery 
(Fig. 8.260).
On each side, the lingual artery originates from the 
external carotid artery in the neck adjacent to the tip of 
the greater horn of the hyoid bone. It forms an upward 
bend and then loops downward and forward to pass deep 
to the hyoglossus muscle, and accompanies the muscle 
through the aperture (oropharyngeal triangle) formed by 
the margins of the mylohyoid, superior constrictor, and 
middle constrictor muscles, and enters the floor of the 
oral cavity.
The lingual artery then travels forward in the plane 
between the hyoglossus and genioglossus muscles to the 
apex of the tongue.
In addition to the tongue, the lingual artery supplies the 
sublingual gland, gingiva, and oral mucosa in the floor of 
the oral cavity.
Veins
The tongue is drained by dorsal lingual and deep lingual 
veins (Fig. 8.260).
The deep lingual veins are visible through the 
mucosa on the undersurface of the tongue. Although they 
Fig. 8.260  Arteries, veins, and nerves of the tongue. 
Lingual nerve
(from [V3])
Chorda tympani (from [VII])
Hypoglossal
nerve [XII]
Occipital
artery
Sternocleidomastoid branch of occipital artery
Lingual artery
Common carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Dorsal lingual vein
Deep lingual vein
Hyoglossus
Glossopharyngeal
nerve [IX]
Fig. 8.261  Innervation of the tongue. 
Anterior two-thirds (oral)
• General sensation
   mandibular nerve [V3]
   via lingual nerve
• Special sensation (taste)
   facial nerve [VII] via
   chorda tympani
Posterior one-third (pharyngeal)
• General and special
   (taste) sensation via
   glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]
Motor
Sensory
Intrinsic muscle
Genioglossus
Hyoglossus
Styloglossus
Hypoglossal
nerve [XII]
Palatoglossus – vagus nerve [X]
accompany the lingual arteries in anterior parts of the 
tongue, they become separated from the arteries posteriorly 
by the hyoglossus muscles. On each side, the deep lingual 
vein travels with the hypoglossal nerve [XII] on the external 
surface of the hyoglossus muscle and passes out of the floor 
of the oral cavity through the aperture (oropharyngeal 
triangle) formed by the margins of the mylohyoid, superior 
constrictor, and middle constrictor muscles. It joins the 
internal jugular vein in the neck.
The dorsal lingual vein follows the lingual artery 
between the hyoglossus and genioglossus muscles and, like 
the deep lingual vein, drains into the internal jugular vein 
in the neck.
Innervation
Innervation of the tongue is complex and involves a 
number of nerves (Figs. 8.260 and 8.261).
Glossopharyngeal nerve [IX]
Taste (SA) and general sensation from the pharyngeal 
part of the tongue are carried by the glossopharyngeal 
nerve [IX].
The glossopharyngeal nerve [IX] leaves the skull 
through the jugular foramen and descends along the 

=== PAGE 1118 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1091
Parotid gland
The parotid gland (see pp. 900–901) on each side is entirely 
outside the boundaries of the oral cavity in a shallow 
triangular-shaped trench (Fig. 8.264) formed by:
■	 the sternocleidomastoid muscle behind,
■	 the ramus of the mandible in front, and
■	 superiorly, the base of the trench is formed by the exter­
nal acoustic meatus and the posterior aspect of the 
zygomatic arch.
The gland normally extends anteriorly over the masseter 
muscle, and inferiorly over the posterior belly of the digas­
tric muscle.
The parotid duct passes anteriorly across the external 
surface of the masseter muscle and then turns medially to 
penetrate the buccinator muscle of the cheek and open 
into the oral cavity adjacent to the crown of the second 
upper molar tooth.
The parotid gland encloses the external carotid artery, 
the retromandibular vein, and the origin of the extracra­
nial part of the facial nerve [VII].
sternocleidomastoid branch of the occipital artery, crosses 
the external carotid artery, and continues forward, cross­
ing the loop of the lingual artery, to reach the external 
surface of the lower one-third of the hyoglossus muscle.
The hypoglossal nerve [XII] follows the hyoglossus 
muscle through the gap (oropharyngeal triangle) between 
the superior constrictor, middle constrictor, and mylohyoid 
muscles to reach the tongue.
In the upper neck, a branch from the anterior ramus of 
C1 joins the hypoglossal nerve [XII]. Most of these C1 fibers 
leave the hypoglossal nerve [XII] as the superior root of the 
ansa cervicalis (Fig. 8.263). Near the posterior border of 
the hyoglossus muscle, the remaining fibers leave the 
hypoglossal nerve [XII] and form two nerves:
■	 the thyrohyoid branch, which remains in the neck to 
innervate the thyrohyoid muscle, and
■	 the branch to the geniohyoid, which passes into the floor 
of the oral cavity to innervate the geniohyoid.
Lymphatics
All lymphatic vessels from the tongue ultimately drain 
into the deep cervical chain of nodes along the internal 
jugular vein:
■	 The pharyngeal part of the tongue drains through the 
pharyngeal wall directly into mainly the jugulodigastric 
node of the deep cervical chain.
■	 The oral part of the tongue drains both directly into the 
deep cervical nodes, and indirectly into these nodes by 
passing first through the mylohyoid muscle and into 
submental and submandibular nodes.
The submental nodes are inferior to the mylohyoid 
muscles and between the digastric muscles, while the 
submandibular nodes are below the floor of the oral cavity 
along the inner aspect of the inferior margins of the 
mandible.
The tip of the tongue drains through the mylohyoid 
muscle into the submental nodes and then into mainly the 
jugulo-omohyoid node of the deep cervical chain.
Salivary glands
Salivary glands are glands that open or secrete into the oral 
cavity. Most are small glands in the submucosa or mucosa 
of the oral epithelium lining the tongue, palate, cheeks, 
and lips, and open into the oral cavity directly or via small 
ducts. In addition to these small glands are much larger 
glands, which include the paired parotid, submandibular, 
and sublingual glands.
Fig. 8.264  Parotid gland. 
Masseter
Buccinator
Parotid duct
(penetrates buccinator opposite
crown of 2nd upper molar tooth)
Sternocleidomastoid
Parotid gland
External acoustic meatus

=== PAGE 1123 ===
Head and Neck
1096
All muscles of the palate are innervated by the vagus 
nerve [X], except for the tensor veli palatini, which is 
innervated by the mandibular nerve [V3] (via the nerve to 
the medial pterygoid).
Tensor veli palatini and the palatine aponeurosis
The tensor veli palatini muscle is composed of two 
parts—a vertical muscular part and a more horizontal 
fibrous part, which forms the palatine aponeurosis 
(Fig. 8.270A).
The vertical part of the tensor veli palatini is thin 
and triangular in shape with its base attached to the 
skull and its apex pointed inferiorly. The base is attached 
along an oblique line that begins medially at the scaphoid 
fossa near the root of the pterygoid process of the sphenoid 
bone and continues laterally along the membranous 
part of the pharyngotympanic tube to the spine of the 
sphenoid bone.
The tensor veli palatini descends vertically along the 
lateral surface of the medial plate of the pterygoid process 
and pharyngeal wall to the pterygoid hamulus where the 
fibers converge to form a small tendon (Fig. 8.270A).
The tendon loops 90° medially around the pterygoid 
hamulus, penetrating the origin of the buccinator muscle 
as it does, and expands like a fan to form the fibrous hori­
zontal part of the muscle. This fibrous part is continuous 
across the midline with its partner on the other side to form 
the palatine aponeurosis.
The palatine aponeurosis is attached anteriorly to the 
margin of the hard palate, but is unattached posteriorly 
where it ends in a free margin. This expansive aponeurosis 
The mucosa of the hard palate in the oral cavity pos­
sesses numerous transverse palatine folds (palatine 
rugae) and a median longitudinal ridge (palatine raphe), 
which ends anteriorly in a small oval elevation (incisive 
papilla). The incisive papilla (Fig. 8.269) overlies the 
incisive fossa formed between the horizontal plates of the 
maxillae immediately behind the incisor teeth.
Soft palate
The soft palate (Fig. 8.269) continues posteriorly from the 
hard palate and acts as a valve that can be:
■	 depressed to help close the oropharyngeal isthmus, and
■	 elevated to separate the nasopharynx from the 
oropharynx.
The soft palate is formed and moved by four muscles and 
is covered by mucosa that is continuous with the mucosa 
lining the pharynx and oral and nasal cavities.
The small tear-shaped muscular projection that 
hangs from the posterior free margin of the soft palate is 
the uvula.
Muscles of  the soft palate
Five muscles (Table 8.22) on each side contribute to the 
formation and movement of the soft palate. Two of these, 
the tensor veli palatini and levator veli palatini, descend 
into the palate from the base of the skull. Two others, 
the palatoglossus and palatopharyngeus, ascend into the 
palate from the tongue and pharynx, respectively. The last 
muscle, the musculus uvulae, is associated with the uvula.
Table 8.22  Muscles of the soft palate
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Tensor veli palatini
Scaphoid fossa of sphenoid 
bone; fibrous part of 
pharyngotympanic tube; 
spine of sphenoid
Palatine aponeurosis
Mandibular nerve [V3] via 
the branch to medial 
pterygoid muscle
Tenses the soft palate; 
opens the 
pharyngotympanic tube
Levator veli palatini
Petrous part of temporal 
bone anterior to opening for 
carotid canal
Superior surface of palatine 
aponeurosis
Vagus nerve [X] via 
pharyngeal branch to 
pharyngeal plexus
Only muscle to elevate the 
soft palate above the 
neutral position
Palatopharyngeus
Superior surface of palatine 
aponeurosis
Pharyngeal wall
Vagus nerve [X] via 
pharyngeal branch to 
pharyngeal plexus
Depresses soft palate; 
moves palatopharyngeal 
arch toward midline; 
elevates pharynx
Palatoglossus
Inferior surface of palatine 
aponeurosis
Lateral margin of tongue
Vagus nerve [X] via 
pharyngeal branch to 
pharyngeal plexus
Depresses palate; moves 
palatoglossal arch toward 
midline; elevates back of 
the tongue
Musculus uvulae
Posterior nasal spine of hard 
palate
Connective tissue of uvula
Vagus nerve [X] via 
pharyngeal branch to 
pharyngeal plexus
Elevates and retracts uvula; 
thickens central region of 
soft palate

=== PAGE 1124 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1097
Fig. 8.270  A. Tensor veli palatini muscles and the palatine aponeurosis. B. Levator veli palatini muscles. C. Palatopharyngeus muscles. 
Muscular part of tensor veli palatini
Cartilaginous part of
pharyngotympanic tube
Fibrous part of pharyngotympanic tube
Palatine aponeurosis
Pterygoid hamulus
Position of palatopharyngeal
sphincter
Pharyngeal raphe
Superior constrictor of pharynx
Pterygomandibular raphe
Buccinator muscle
Pterygopalatine fossa
A
B
C
Nasal cavity
Medial pterygoid plate
Lateral pterygoid plate
Nasal septum
Levator veli palatini
Palatopharyngeus

=== PAGE 1125 ===
Head and Neck
1098
is the major structural element of the soft palate to which 
the other muscles of the palate attach.
The tensor veli palatini:
■	 tenses (makes firm) the soft palate so that the other 
muscles attached to the palate can work more effectively, 
and
■	 opens the pharyngotympanic tube when the palate 
moves during yawning and swallowing as a result of its 
attachment superiorly to the membranous part of the 
pharyngotympanic tube.
The tensor veli palatini is innervated by the nerve to the 
medial pterygoid from the mandibular nerve [V3].
Levator veli palatini
The levator veli palatini muscle originates from the base of 
the skull and descends to the upper surface of the palatine 
aponeurosis (Fig. 8.270B). On the skull, it originates from 
a roughened area on the petrous part of the temporal bone 
immediately anterior to the opening of the carotid canal. 
Some fibers also originate from adjacent parts of the pha­
ryngotympanic tube.
The levator veli palatini passes anteroinferiorly through 
fascia of the pharyngeal wall, passes medial to the pharyn­
gotympanic tube, and inserts onto the palatine aponeurosis 
(Fig. 8.270B). Its fibers interlace at the midline with those 
of the levator veli palatini on the other side.
Unlike the tensor veli palatini muscles, the levator veli 
palatini muscles do not pass around each pterygoid 
hamulus, but course directly from the base of the skull to 
the upper surface of the palatine aponeurosis. Therefore, 
they are the only muscles that can elevate the palate above 
the neutral position and close the pharyngeal isthmus 
between the nasopharynx and oropharynx.
The levator veli palatini is innervated by the vagus nerve 
[X] through the pharyngeal branch to the pharyngeal 
plexus. Clinically, the levator veli palatini can be tested by 
asking a patient to say “ah.” If the muscle on each side is 
functioning normally, the palate elevates evenly in the 
midline. If one side is not functioning, the palate deviates 
away from the abnormal side.
Palatopharyngeus
The palatopharyngeus muscle originates from the superior 
surface of the palatine aponeurosis and passes posterolat­
erally over its margin to descend and become one of the 
longitudinal muscles of the pharyngeal wall (Fig. 8.270C). 
It is attached to the palatine aponeurosis by two flat 
Fig. 8.271  Open mouth with soft palate. A. Oropharyngeal 
isthmus opened. B. Oropharyngeal isthmus closed. 
A
B
Palatoglossal arch
Palatopharyngeal arch
Posterior wall of oropharynx
Soft palate
Soft palate
Tongue
Uvula
Palatine tonsil
Anterior margin of
oropharyngeal isthmus
(palatoglossal arch)
Closure of oropharyngeal isthmus
• Medial and downward movement of palatoglossal arches
• Medial and downward movement of palatopharyngeal arches
• Upward movement of tongue
• Downward and forward movement of soft palate
lamellae separated by the levator veli palatini muscle. The 
more anterior and lateral of these two lamellae is attached 
to the posterior margin of the hard palate as well as to the 
palatine aponeurosis.
The two palatopharyngeus muscles, one on each side, 
underlie the palatopharyngeal arches on the oropha­
ryngeal wall. The palatopharyngeal arches lie posterior 
and medial to the palatoglossal arches when viewed 
anteriorly through the oral cavity (Fig. 8.271).

=== PAGE 1129 ===
Head and Neck
1102
General sensory fibers carried in all these nerves 
originate in the pterygopalatine fossa from the maxillary 
nerve [V2].
Parasympathetic (to glands) and SA (taste on soft 
palate) fibers from a branch of the facial nerve [VII] join 
the nerves in the pterygopalatine fossa, as do the sympa­
thetics (mainly to blood vessels) ultimately derived from the 
T1 spinal cord level.
Greater and lesser palatine nerves
The greater and lesser palatine nerves descend through the 
pterygopalatine fossa and palatine canal to reach the palate 
(Fig. 8.276):
■	 The greater palatine nerve travels through the greater 
palatine foramen and turns anteriorly to supply the 
hard palate and gingiva as far as the first premolar.
Veins
Veins from the palate generally follow the arteries and 
ultimately drain into the pterygoid plexus of veins in the 
infratemporal fossa (Fig. 8.275; also see pp. 980–981), or 
into a network of veins associated with the palatine tonsil, 
which drain into the pharyngeal plexus of veins or directly 
into the facial vein.
Lymphatics
Lymphatic vessels from the palate drain into deep cervical 
nodes (Fig. 8.275).
Innervation
The palate is supplied by the greater and lesser palatine 
nerves and the nasopalatine nerve (Figs. 8.274 and 
8.276).
Fig. 8.275  Venous and lymphatic drainage of the palate. 
Maxillary vein
Pterygoid plexus
Lymph from palate
Deep cervical nodes
Internal jugular vein
Facial vein
Venous drainage
from palate

=== PAGE 1130 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1103
descends through the incisive canal and fossa to reach the 
inferior surface of the hard palate (Fig. 8.276).
The nasopalatine nerve supplies gingiva and mucosa 
adjacent to the incisors and canine.
Oral fissure and lips
The oral fissure is the slit-like opening between the lips that 
connects the oral vestibule to the outside (Fig. 8.277). It 
■	 The lesser palatine nerve passes posteromedially to 
supply the soft palate.
Nasopalatine nerve
The nasopalatine nerve also originates in the pterygopala­
tine fossa, but passes medially into the nasal cavity. It 
continues medially over the roof of the nasal cavity to 
reach the medial wall, then anteriorly and obliquely down 
the wall to reach the incisive canal in the anterior floor, and 
Fig. 8.276  Innervation of the palate. 
Greater petrosal nerve 
(preganglionic parasympathetic
and special sensory [taste])
[VII]
Deep petrosal nerve 
(postganglionic 
sympathetic)
Superior cervical 
sympathetic ganglion
Sympathetic trunk
Preganglionic
sympathetic from T1
Uvula
Internal carotid artery
Nerve of pterygoid canal
Lesser palatine nerve
Lesser palatine foramen
Greater palatine nerve
Nasopalatine nerve
Greater palatine foramen
Palatine canal
Pterygopalatine
 ganglion
Nasopalatine nerve
Maxillary nerve
[V]
Fig. 8.277  Oral fissure and lips. A. Anterior view. B. Sagittal section. 
Philtrum
Vestibule
Orbicularis oris muscle
Oral fissure
Vermilion border of lip
Facial artery
Superior and
 inferior labial
 arteries
A
B
Labial salivary 
glands
Artery and vein
Vermilion
 borders
Orbicularis oris 
muscle
Buccinator 
muscle

=== PAGE 1133 ===
Head and Neck
1106
posterolateral surface of the maxilla, branches, and 
enters small canals in the bone to supply the molar and 
premolar teeth.
The anterior superior alveolar artery originates 
from the infra-orbital artery, which arises from the maxil­
lary artery in the pterygopalatine fossa. The infra-orbital 
artery leaves the pterygopalatine fossa through the inferior 
orbital fissure and enters the inferior orbital groove and 
canal in the floor of the orbit. The anterior superior alveolar 
artery originates from the infra-orbital artery in the infra-
orbital canal. It passes through bone and branches to 
supply the incisor and canine teeth.
Gingival supply
The gingivae are supplied by multiple vessels and the 
source depends on which side of each tooth the gingiva 
is—the side facing the oral vestibule or cheek (vestibular or 
buccal side), or the side facing the tongue or palate (lingual 
or palatal side):
■	 Buccal gingiva of the lower teeth is supplied by branches 
from the inferior alveolar artery, whereas the lingual 
side is supplied by branches from the lingual artery of 
the tongue.
Vessels
Arteries
All teeth are supplied by vessels that branch either directly 
or indirectly from the maxillary artery (Fig. 8.279).
Inferior alveolar artery
All lower teeth are supplied by the inferior alveolar 
artery, which originates from the maxillary artery in the 
infratemporal fossa. The vessel enters the mandibular 
canal of the mandible, passes anteriorly in bone supplying 
vessels to the more posterior teeth, and divides opposite 
the first premolar into incisor and mental branches. The 
mental branch leaves the mental foramen to supply the 
chin, while the incisor branch continues in bone to supply 
the anterior teeth and adjacent structures.
Anterior and posterior superior alveolar arteries
All upper teeth are supplied by anterior and posterior 
superior alveolar arteries.
The posterior superior alveolar artery originates 
from the maxillary artery just after the maxillary artery 
enters the pterygopalatine fossa and it leaves the fossa 
through the pterygomaxillary fissure. It descends on the 
Fig. 8.279  Arteries and veins of the teeth. 
Cavernous sinus
in cranial cavity
Emissary veins
Infra-orbital
artery and vein
Posterior superior alveolar
artery and vein
Anterior superior alveolar
artery and vein
Inferior alveolar artery and
vein in mandibular canal
Facial vein
Internal jugular vein
External jugular vein
External carotid artery
Pterygoid plexus of veins
Retromandibular vein
Maxillary vein
Maxillary artery

=== PAGE 1134 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Oral Cavity
8
1107
Venous drainage from the teeth can also be via vessels 
that pass through the mental foramen to connect with the 
facial vein.
Veins from the gingivae also follow the arteries and 
ultimately drain into the facial vein or into the pterygoid 
plexus of veins.
Lymphatics
Lymphatic vessels from the teeth and gingivae drain mainly 
into submandibular, submental, and deep cervical nodes 
(Fig. 8.280).
Innervation
All nerves that innervate the teeth and gingivae are 
branches of the trigeminal nerve [V] (Figs. 8.281 and 
8.282).
Inferior alveolar nerve
The lower teeth are all innervated by branches from the 
inferior alveolar nerve, which originates in the infratempo­
ral fossa from the mandibular nerve [V3] (Figs. 8.281 and 
8.282). The inferior alveolar nerve and its accompanying 
vessels enter the mandibular foramen on the medial surface 
■	 Buccal gingiva of the upper teeth is supplied by branches 
of the anterior and posterior superior alveolar arteries.
■	 Palatal gingiva is supplied by branches from the naso­
palatine (incisor and canine teeth) and greater palatine 
(premolar and molar teeth) arteries.
Veins
Veins from the upper and lower teeth generally follow the 
arteries (Fig. 8.279).
Inferior alveolar veins from the lower teeth, and superior 
alveolar veins from the upper teeth drain mainly into the 
pterygoid plexus of veins in the infratemporal fossa, 
although some drainage from the anterior teeth may be via 
tributaries of the facial vein.
The pterygoid plexus drains mainly into the maxillary 
vein and ultimately into the retromandibular vein and 
jugular system of veins. In addition, small communicating 
vessels pass superiorly, from the plexus, and pass through 
small emissary foramina in the base of the skull to connect 
with the cavernous sinus in the cranial cavity. Infection 
originating in the teeth can track into the cranial cavity 
through these small emissary veins.
Fig. 8.280  Lymphatic drainage of the teeth and gums. 
Deep cervical nodes
Submandibular nodes
Submental nodes

=== PAGE 1137 ===
Head and Neck
1110
Anatomical position of the head 
and major landmarks
The head is in the anatomical position when the inferior 
margins of the bony orbits and the superior margins of the 
external acoustic meatuses are in the same horizontal 
plane (Frankfort plane).
In addition to the external acoustic meatus and the 
bony margin of the orbit, other features that are palpable 
include the head of the mandible, zygomatic arch, zygo­
matic bone, mastoid process, and external occipital protu­
berance (Fig. 8.283).
Surface anatomy
Head and neck surface anatomy
Skeletal landmarks in the head and neck are used for locat­
ing major blood vessels, glands, and muscles, and for 
locating points of access to the airway.
Neurological examination of the cranial and upper 
cervical nerves is carried out by assessing function in the 
head and neck.
In addition, information about the general status of 
body health can often be obtained by evaluating surface 
features, the eye and the oral cavity, and the characteristics 
of speech.
Fig. 8.283  Anatomical position of the head and major landmarks. Lateral head and neck of a man. 
External occipital
protuberance
Cervical spinal nerves
External acoustic meatus
Sternocleidomastoid muscle
Angle of mandible
Mastoid process
Vertex
Zygomatic bone
Frankfort line
Inferior margin of orbit
Position of head of mandible
Position of zygomatic arch
[V1]
[V2]
[V3]

=== PAGE 1138 ===
8
1111
Surface Anatomy  •  Visualizing Structures at the CIII/CIV and CVI Vertebral Levels
where there is a transition from cervical to cranial innerva­
tion of the scalp. Anterior to the vertex, the scalp and face 
are innervated by the trigeminal nerve [V]. Posterior to the 
vertex, the scalp is innervated by branches from cervical 
spinal nerves.
Visualizing structures at the CIII/CIV 
and CVI vertebral levels
Two vertebral levels in the neck are associated with impor­
tant anatomical features (Fig. 8.284).
The intervertebral disc between the CIII and CIV verte­
brae is in the same horizontal plane as the bifurcation of 
the common carotid artery into the internal and external 
carotid arteries. This level is approximately at the upper 
margin of the thyroid cartilage.
Vertebral level CVI marks the transition from pharynx 
to esophagus and larynx to trachea. The CVI vertebral level 
therefore marks the superior ends of the esophagus and 
trachea and is approximately at the level of the inferior 
margin of the cricoid cartilage.
The head of the mandible is anterior to the external ear 
and behind and inferior to the posterior end of the zygo­
matic arch. It is best found by opening and closing the jaw 
and palpating the head of the mandible as it moves forward 
onto the articular tubercle and then back into the man­
dibular fossa, respectively.
The zygomatic arch extends forward from the region of 
the temporomandibular joint to the zygomatic bone, which 
forms a bony prominence lateral to the inferior margin of 
the anterior opening of the orbit.
The mastoid process is a large bony protuberance that 
is easily palpable posterior to the inferior aspect of the 
external acoustic meatus. The superior end of the sterno­
cleidomastoid muscle attaches to the mastoid process.
The external occipital protuberance is palpable in the 
midline posteriorly where the contour of the skull curves 
sharply forward. This landmark marks the point superfi­
cially where the back of the neck joins the head.
Another clinically useful feature of the head is the 
vertex. This is the highest point of the head in the anatomi­
cal position and marks the approximate point on the scalp 
Fig. 8.284  Visualizing structures at the CIII/IV and CVI vertebral levels. Lateral head and neck of a man. 
Vertebral level CVI
• Arch of cricoid cartilage
• Superior end of esophagus
• Superior end of trachea
Vertebral level CIII/IV
• Upper margin of thyroid cartilage
• Bifurcation of common carotid artery
Bifurcation of common carotid
Frankfort line
Esophagus
Arch of cricoid
Pharynx

=== PAGE 1139 ===
Head and Neck
1112
The anterior triangles are associated with structures 
such as the airway and digestive tract, and nerves and 
vessels that pass between the thorax and head. They are 
also associated with the thyroid and parathyroid glands.
The base of each posterior triangle is the middle one-
third of the clavicle. The medial margin is the posterior 
border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and the lateral 
margin is the anterior border of the trapezius muscle. The 
apex points superiorly and is immediately posteroinferior 
to the mastoid process.
The posterior triangles are associated with nerves and 
vessels that pass into and out of the upper limbs.
How to outline the anterior and posterior 
triangles of the neck
The boundaries of the anterior and posterior triangles on 
each side of the neck are easily established using readily 
visible bony and muscular landmarks (Fig. 8.285).
The base of each anterior triangle is the inferior margin 
of the mandible, the anterior margin is the midline of the 
neck, and the posterior margin is the anterior border 
of the sternocleidomastoid muscle. The apex of each 
anterior triangle points inferiorly and is at the supraster­
nal notch.
Fig. 8.285  How to outline the anterior and posterior triangles of the neck. A. In a woman, anterolateral view. The left anterior triangle is 
indicated. B. In a man, anterior view of the posterior triangle. 
A
B
Midline of neck
Anterior margin of
sternocleidomastoid
Anterior margin of
trapezius
Clavicle
Posterior margin of
sternocleidomastoid
Posterior triangle
Anterior triangle
Inferior margin of mandible
Structures coursing between
head and thorax are associated
with the anterior triangles
Structures coursing between
thorax/neck and upper limb are
associated with the posterior triangles

=== PAGE 1145 ===
Head and Neck
1118
■	 Facial pulse—the facial artery can be palpated as it 
crosses the inferior border of the mandible immediately 
adjacent to the anterior margin of the masseter muscle.
■	 Temporal pulse—the superficial temporal artery can be 
palpated anterior to the ear and immediately postero­
superior to the position of the temporomandibular 
joint.
■	 Temporal pulse—the anterior branch of the superficial 
temporal artery can be palpated posterior to the zygo­
matic process of the frontal bone as it passes lateral to 
the temporal fascia and into anterolateral regions of the 
scalp. In some individuals pulsations of the superficial 
temporal artery can be seen through the skin.
Pulse points
Arterial pulses can be felt at four locations in the head and 
neck (Fig. 8.292).
■	 Carotid pulse—the common or external carotid artery 
can be palpated in the anterior triangle of the neck. This 
is one of the strongest pulses in the body. The pulse can 
be obtained by palpating either the common carotid 
artery posterolateral to the larynx or the external carotid 
artery immediately lateral to the pharynx midway 
between the superior margin of the thyroid cartilage 
below and the greater horn of the hyoid bone above.
Fig. 8.292  Where to take arterial pulses in the head and neck. 
Temporal pulse
(superficial temporal artery)
Temporal pulse
(anterior branch of
superficial temporal artery)
Carotid pulse
Facial pulse

=== PAGE 1149 ===
8
Clinical Cases  •  Case 4
1121.e1
Case 4
PAROTID DUCT CALCULUS
A 25-year-old man complained of significant swelling in 
front of his right ear before and around mealtimes. This 
swelling was associated with considerable pain, which was 
provoked by the ingestion of lemon sweets. On 
examination he had tenderness around the right parotid 
region and a hard nodule was demonstrated in the buccal 
mucosa adjacent to the right upper molar teeth.
A diagnosis of parotid duct calculus was made.
The formation of stones in the salivary glands is not 
uncommon, but it is more likely in the submandibular gland 
than in the parotid gland because the saliva is more 
mucinous and the duct has a long upward course from the 
floor of the mouth. Nevertheless, stones do form in the 
parotid gland and the parotid ducts. Notably, most parotid 
duct calculi and submandibular duct calculi occur in mouths 
with excellent dental hygiene and mucosa.
An ultrasound scan was performed.
An initial ultrasound scan demonstrated a stone in the distal 
end of the right parotid duct with evidence of ductal dilation 
(eFig. 8.294). Assessment of the gland also demonstrated 
dilated ducts within the gland and evidence of intraparotid 
lymphadenopathy.
The patient was treated with antibiotics.
A course of antibiotics was given to remove the bacteria that 
had produced the inflammation. On return to the doctor 
some days later the gland was normal in size and there was 
no evidence of inflammation or infection.
An operation was necessary.
The stone was at the distal end of the parotid duct and it 
would seem logical and straightforward to make a small 
incision at the sphincter in the buccal mucosa and deliver 
the stone, thus permitting the gland to drain normally. 
Unfortunately, in this patient’s case the gland was 
significantly destroyed by the chronic obstruction and 
bacterial infection. Furthermore, smaller calculi were also 
demonstrated in the gland at ultrasound. On direct 
questioning it appeared that the patient had had numerous 
attacks over the previous 4–5 years and it was decided that 
the parotid gland should be removed surgically.
The patient consented for removal of the parotid gland and a 
discussion of the possibility for loss of facial function and 
facial paralysis was had with the patient at this time.
Within the parotid gland the facial nerve [VII] divides into its 
five terminal branches. At operation the gland is displayed 
and extremely careful dissection is necessary to peel away 
the parotid gland from the branches of the facial nerve [VII]. 
This procedure was made more difficult by the chronic 
inflammatory change within the gland. After the procedure 
the patient made a good recovery, though there was some 
mild paralysis of the whole of the right side of the face. 
Importantly, taste to the anterior two-thirds of the tongue 
was preserved. The taste fibers to the anterior two-thirds of 
the tongue travel in the chorda tympani nerve, which is a 
branch of the facial nerve [VII]. This nerve leaves the facial 
nerve [VII] to join the lingual nerve proximal to the parotid 
gland; therefore, any damage to the facial nerve [VII] within 
the parotid gland does not affect special sensation (taste).
Over the following week the paralysis improved and was 
likely due to nerve bruising during the procedure. The 
patient remained asymptomatic.
eFig. 8.294  Ultrasound scan (axial view) demonstrating a stone 
in a dilated parotid duct. 
Stone
Duct
Masseter muscle
