=== PAGE 615 ===
Lower Limb
598
flexion and extension. Like all hinge joints, the knee joint 
is reinforced by collateral ligaments, one on each side of 
the joint. In addition, two very strong ligaments (the cruci­
ate ligaments) interconnect the adjacent ends of the femur 
and tibia and maintain their opposed positions during 
movement.
Because the knee joint is involved in weight-bearing, it 
has an efficient “locking” mechanism to reduce the amount 
of muscle energy required to keep the joint extended when 
standing.
Articular surfaces
The articular surfaces of the bones that contribute to the 
knee joint are covered by hyaline cartilage. The major 
surfaces involved include:
■	 the two femoral condyles, and
■	 the adjacent surfaces of the superior aspect of the tibial 
condyles.
The tibial nerve descends through the popliteal fossa, 
enters the posterior compartment of the leg, and continues 
into the sole of the foot.
The tibial nerve innervates:
■	 all muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg,
■	 all intrinsic muscles in the sole of the foot including the 
first two dorsal interossei muscles, which also may 
receive innervation from the deep fibular nerve, and
■	 skin on the posterolateral side of the lower half of the 
leg and lateral side of the ankle, foot, and little toe, and 
skin on the sole of the foot and toes.
Common fibular nerve
The common fibular part of the sciatic nerve innervates 
the short head of the biceps femoris in the posterior com­
partment of the thigh and then continues into the lateral 
and anterior compartments of the leg and onto the foot 
(Fig. 6.70).
The common fibular nerve innervates:
■	 all muscles in the anterior and lateral compartments 
of the leg,
■	 one muscle (extensor digitorum brevis) on the dorsal 
aspect of the foot,
■	 the first two dorsal interossei muscles in the sole of the 
foot, and
■	 skin over the lateral aspect of the leg, and ankle, and 
over the dorsal aspect of the foot and toes.
Knee joint
The knee joint is the largest synovial joint in the body. It 
consists of:
■	 the articulation between the femur and tibia, which is 
weight-bearing, and
■	 the articulation between the patella and the femur, 
which allows the pull of the quadriceps femoris muscle 
to be directed anteriorly over the knee to the tibia 
without tendon wear (Fig. 6.71).
Two fibrocartilaginous menisci, one on each side, 
between the femoral condyles and tibia accommodate 
changes in the shape of the articular surfaces during joint 
movements.
The detailed movements of the knee joint are complex, 
but basically the joint is a hinge joint that allows mainly 
Fig. 6.71  Knee joint. Joint capsule is not shown. 
Intercondylar fossa
Tendon of
popliteus
muscle
Fibular collateral
ligament
Lateral
meniscus
Proximal tibiofibular joint
Patellar
ligament
Infrapatellar fat
Patella
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Posterior cruciate
ligament

=== PAGE 616 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
599
Fig. 6.72  Articular surfaces of the knee joint. A. Extended. 
B. Flexed. C. Anterior view (flexed). 
A
C
B
Flat
Patella
Round
Femur
Meniscus
Tibia
Intercondylar region
Patella
Surface for
articulation
with patella
Flat surfaces for
articulation with
tibia in extension
Round surfaces for
articulation with
tibia in flexion
Meniscus
Anterior
cruciate
ligament
Posterior
cruciate
ligament
The surfaces of the femoral condyles that articulate 
with the tibia in flexion of the knee are curved or round, 
whereas the surfaces that articulate in full extension are 
flat (Fig. 6.72).
The articular surfaces between the femur and patella 
are the V-shaped trench on the anterior surface of the 
distal end of the femur where the two condyles join and 
the adjacent surfaces on the posterior aspect of the patella. 
The joint surfaces are all enclosed within a single articular 
cavity, as are the intraarticular menisci between the 
femoral and tibial condyles.
A
Patellar ligament
Joint capsule
Medial meniscus
Popliteus tendon
Lateral meniscus
Transverse ligament of the knee
Infrapatellar fat
Fig. 6.73  Menisci of the knee joint. A. Superior view.
Menisci
There are two menisci, which are fibrocartilaginous 
C-shaped cartilages, in the knee joint, one medial (medial 
meniscus) and the other lateral (lateral meniscus) (Fig. 
6.73). Both are attached at each end to facets in the inter­
condylar region of the tibial plateau.
The medial meniscus is attached around its margin to 
the capsule of the joint and to the tibial collateral ligament, 
whereas the lateral meniscus is unattached to the capsule. 
Therefore, the lateral meniscus is more mobile than the 
medial meniscus.
The menisci are interconnected anteriorly by a trans­
verse ligament of the knee. The lateral meniscus is also 
connected to the tendon of the popliteus muscle, which 
passes superolaterally between this meniscus and the 
capsule to insert on the femur.
The menisci improve congruency between the femoral 
and tibial condyles during joint movements where the 
surfaces of the femoral condyles articulating with the tibial 
plateau change from small curved surfaces in flexion to 
large flat surfaces in extension.
Continues

=== PAGE 617 ===
Lower Limb
600
B
Anterior
Normal medial meniscus
Tibia
Medial femoral condyle
C
Anterior
Normal lateral meniscus
Fibula
Tibia
Lateral femoral condyle
Menisci of the knee joint. B. Normal knee joint showing the medial meniscus. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the 
sagittal plane. C. Normal knee joint showing the lateral meniscus. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. 
Fig. 6.73, cont’d

=== PAGE 618 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
601
In the clinic
Meniscal injuries
Menisci can get torn during forceful rotation or twisting of 
the knee, but significant trauma is not always necessary for 
a tear to occur. There are various patterns of meniscal 
tearing depending on the cleavage plane such as vertical 
tears (perpendicular to the tibial plateau), horizontal tears 
(parallel to the long axis of the meniscus and perpendicular 
to the tibial plateau), or bucket handle tears (longitudinal 
tear where the torn portion of the meniscus forms a handle 
shaped fragment which gets displaced into the intercondylar 
notch).
The patient usually complains of pain localized to the 
medial or lateral side of the knee, knee locking or clicking, 
sensation of knee giving way, and swelling, which can be 
intermittent and usually delayed.
MRI is the modality of choice to assess meniscal tears 
and detect other associated injuries, such as ligamentous 
tears and articular cartilage damage (Fig. 6.74A). Arthroscopy 
is usually performed to repair a tear, debride the damaged 
meniscal material, or rarely remove the entire torn meniscus 
(Fig. 6.74B).
Fig. 6.74  Meniscal injury and repair. A. Sagittal MRI of a knee joint showing tear of the medial meniscus. B. Coronal MRI of a knee 
showing a truncated lateral meniscus after partial meniscectomy to treat a tear. 
B
A
Medial 
meniscus tear

=== PAGE 619 ===
Lower Limb
602
Fig. 6.75  Synovial membrane of the knee joint and associated bursae. A. Superolateral view; patella and femur not shown. B. Paramedial 
sagittal section through the knee. 
Infrapatellar fold
Posterior cruciate ligament
A
B
Anterior cruciate ligament
Synovial
membrane
Lateral
meniscus
Popliteus
tendon
Subpopliteal
recess
Fibula
Tibia
Alar fold
Patellar
ligament
Infrapatellar fat
Infrapatellar fat
Suprapatellar
bursa
Articularis
genus
Posterior
Patellar
ligament
Subcutaneous and
deep infrapatellar
bursae
Patella
Prepatellar
bursa
Anterior
Quadriceps
femoris tendon
Synovial membrane
The synovial membrane of the knee joint attaches to the 
margins of the articular surfaces and to the superior and 
inferior outer margins of the menisci (Fig. 6.75A). The two 
cruciate ligaments, which attach in the intercondylar 
region of the tibia below and the intercondylar fossa of the 
femur above, are outside the articular cavity, but enclosed 
within the fibrous membrane of the knee joint.
Posteriorly, the synovial membrane reflects off the 
fibrous membrane of the joint capsule on either side of 
the posterior cruciate ligament and loops forward around 
both ligaments thereby excluding them from the articular 
cavity.
Anteriorly, the synovial membrane is separated from the 
patellar ligament by an infrapatellar fat pad. On each 
side of the pad, the synovial membrane forms a fringed 
margin (an alar fold), which projects into the articular 
cavity. In addition, the synovial membrane covering 
the lower part of the infrapatellar fat pad is raised into a 
sharp midline fold directed posteriorly (the infrapatellar 
synovial fold), which attaches to the margin of the inter­
condylar fossa of the femur.
The synovial membrane of the knee joint forms pouches 
in two locations to provide low-friction surfaces for the 
movement of tendons associated with the joint:
■	 The smallest of these expansions is the subpopliteal 
recess (Fig. 6.75A), which extends posterolaterally 
from the articular cavity and lies between the lateral 
meniscus and the tendon of the popliteus muscle, which 
passes through the joint capsule.
■	 The second expansion is the suprapatellar bursa (Fig. 
6.75B), a large bursa that is a continuation of the 
articular cavity superiorly between the distal end of the 
shaft of the femur and the quadriceps femoris muscle 
and tendon—the apex of this bursa is attached to the 
small articularis genus muscle, which pulls the bursa 
away from the joint during extension of the knee.
Other bursae associated with the knee but not normally 
communicating with the articular cavity include the 

=== PAGE 620 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
603
■	 Anteriorly, the fibrous membrane is attached to the 
margins of the patella where it is reinforced with tendi­
nous expansions from the vastus lateralis and vastus 
medialis muscles, which also merge above with the 
quadriceps femoris tendon and below with the patellar 
ligament.
The fibrous membrane is reinforced anterolaterally by a 
fibrous extension from the iliotibial tract and posteromedi­
ally by an extension from the tendon of the semimembra­
nosus (the oblique popliteal ligament), which reflects 
superiorly across the back of the fibrous membrane from 
medial to lateral.
The upper end of the popliteus muscle passes through 
an aperture in the posterolateral aspect of the fibrous 
membrane of the knee and is enclosed by the fibrous 
membrane as its tendon travels around the joint to insert 
on the lateral aspect of the lateral femoral condyle.
Ligaments
The major ligaments associated with the knee joint are the 
patellar ligament, the tibial (medial) and fibular (lateral) 
collateral ligaments, and the anterior and posterior cruci­
ate ligaments.
subcutaneous prepatellar bursa, deep and subcutaneous 
infrapatellar bursae, and numerous other bursae associ­
ated with tendons and ligaments around the joint 
(Fig. 6.75B).
The prepatellar bursa is subcutaneous and anterior 
to the patella. The deep and subcutaneous infrapatellar 
bursae are on the deep and subcutaneous sides of the 
patellar ligament, respectively.
Fibrous membrane
The fibrous membrane of the knee joint is extensive and is 
partly formed and reinforced by extensions from tendons 
of the surrounding muscles (Fig. 6.76). In general, the 
fibrous membrane encloses the articular cavity and the 
intercondylar region:
■	 On the medial side of the knee joint, the fibrous 
membrane blends with the tibial collateral ligament 
and is attached on its internal surface to the medial 
meniscus.
■	 Laterally, the external surface of the fibrous membrane 
is separated by a space from the fibular collateral liga­
ment and the internal surface of the fibrous membrane 
is not attached to the lateral meniscus.
Fig. 6.76  Fibrous membrane of the knee joint capsule. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. 
A
B
Vastus lateralis
muscle
Quadriceps femoris
tendon
Vastus medialis
muscle
Tibial collateral
ligament
Semitendinosus
Gracilis
Sartorius
Patellar ligament
Iliotibial tract
Fibular collateral
ligament
Oblique popliteal
ligament
Popliteus muscle
Semimembranosus
tendon

=== PAGE 621 ===
Lower Limb
604
The cord-like fibular collateral ligament is attached 
superiorly to the lateral femoral epicondyle just above the 
groove for the popliteus tendon. Inferiorly, it is attached to 
a depression on the lateral surface of the fibular head. It is 
separated from the fibrous membrane by a bursa.
The broad and flat tibial collateral ligament is 
attached by much of its deep surface to the underlying 
fibrous membrane. It is anchored superiorly to the medial 
femoral epicondyle just inferior to the adductor tubercle 
and descends anteriorly to attach to the medial margin and 
Patellar ligament
The patellar ligament is basically the continuation of 
the quadriceps femoris tendon inferior to the patella 
(Fig. 6.76). It is attached above to the margins and apex of 
the patella and below to the tibial tuberosity.
Collateral ligaments
The collateral ligaments, one on each side of the joint, 
stabilize the hinge-like motion of the knee (Fig. 6.77).
Fig. 6.77  Collateral ligaments of the knee joint. A. Lateral view. B. Medial view. C. Normal knee joint showing the patellar ligament and the 
fibular collateral ligament. T1-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. D. Normal knee joint showing the tibial collateral 
ligament, the medial and lateral menisci, and the anterior and posterior cruciate ligaments. T1-weighted magnetic resonance image in the 
coronal plane. 
A
C
D
B
Fibular collateral
ligament
Tendon of
popliteus muscle
Biceps femoris
Iliotibial tract
Tibial collateral
ligament
Attaches to
capsule
Semitendinosus
Gracilis
Sartorius
Patellar ligament
Attaches to
medial meniscus
Patella
Patellar ligament
Lateral femoral condyle
Fibula
Fibular
collateral
ligament
Tibial
collateral
ligament
Tibia
Tibia
Medial femoral condyle
Posterior cruciate ligament
Anterior cruciate ligament 
Lateral femoral
condyle
Medial meniscus
Lateral meniscus

=== PAGE 622 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
605
The anterior cruciate ligament prevents anterior 
displacement of the tibia relative to the femur and the 
posterior cruciate ligament restricts posterior displacement 
(Fig. 6.78).
Locking mechanism
When standing, the knee joint is locked into position, 
thereby reducing the amount of muscle work needed to 
maintain the standing position (Fig. 6.79).
One component of the locking mechanism is a change 
in the shape and size of the femoral surfaces that articulate 
with the tibia:
■	 In flexion, the surfaces are the curved and rounded 
areas on the posterior aspects of the femoral condyles.
medial surface of the tibia above and behind the attach­
ment of the sartorius, gracilis, and semitendinosus tendons.
Cruciate ligaments
The two cruciate ligaments are in the intercondylar 
region of the knee and interconnect the femur and tibia 
(Figs. 6.77D and 6.78). They are termed “cruciate” (Latin 
for “shaped like a cross”) because they cross each other 
in the sagittal plane between their femoral and tibial 
attachments:
■	 The anterior cruciate ligament attaches to a facet 
on the anterior part of the intercondylar area of the 
tibia and ascends posteriorly to attach to a facet at 
the back of the lateral wall of the intercondylar fossa 
of the femur.
■	 The posterior cruciate ligament attaches to the 
posterior aspect of the intercondylar area of the tibia 
and ascends anteriorly to attach to the medial wall of 
the intercondylar fossa of the femur.
The anterior cruciate ligament crosses lateral to the 
posterior cruciate ligament as they pass through the inter­
condylar region.
Fig. 6.78  Cruciate ligaments of the knee joint. Superolateral view. 
Anterior cruciate
ligament
Posterior cruciate
ligament
Intercondylar fossa
Posterior
Anterior
Posterior displacement
of tibia on fixed femur
restricted by posterior
cruciate ligament
Anterior displacement
of tibia on fixed femur
restricted by anterior
cruciate ligament
Fig. 6.79  Knee “locking” mechanism. 
Medial rotation of 
femur on tibia 
tightens ligaments
Flat surface of
femoral condyles
is in contact with
tibia and stabilizes
joint
Line of center of gravity is
anterior to knee joint and
maintains extension

=== PAGE 623 ===
Lower Limb
606
■	 As the knee is extended, the surfaces move to the broad 
and flat areas on the inferior aspects of the femoral 
condyles.
Consequently the joint surfaces become larger and more 
stable in extension.
Another component of the locking mechanism is medial 
rotation of the femur on the tibia during extension. Medial 
rotation and full extension tightens all the associated 
ligaments.
Another feature that keeps the knee extended when 
standing is that the body’s center of gravity is positioned 
along a vertical line that passes anterior to the knee joint.
The popliteus muscle unlocks the knee by initiating 
lateral rotation of the femur on the tibia.
Vascular supply and innervation
Vascular supply to the knee joint is predominantly through 
descending and genicular branches from the femoral, pop­
liteal, and lateral circumflex femoral arteries in the thigh 
and the circumflex fibular artery and recurrent branches 
from the anterior tibial artery in the leg. These vessels form 
an anastomotic network around the joint (Fig. 6.80).
The knee joint is innervated by branches from the 
obturator, femoral, tibial, and common fibular nerves.
Fig. 6.80  Anastomoses of arteries around the knee. Anterior 
view. 
Femoral artery
Adductor
hiatus
Descending
genicular artery
Adductor
magnus
Saphenous
branch
Superior medial
genicular artery
Popliteal
artery
Inferior medial
genicular artery
Posterior
tibial artery
Anterior
tibial artery
Interosseous
membrane
Recurrent branch
of anterior tibial
Circumflex
fibular artery
Inferior lateral
genicular artery
Superior lateral
genicular artery
Descending branch of lateral
 circumflex femoral artery
In the clinic
Collateral ligament injuries
The collateral ligaments are responsible for stabilizing the 
knee joint, controlling its sideway movements, and 
protecting the knee from excessive motion.
Injury to the fibular collateral ligament occurs when 
excessive outward force is applied to the medial side of 
the knee (varus force), and is less common than an injury 
to the tibial collateral ligament that is damaged when 
excessive force is applied inward to the lateral side of the 
joint (valgus force). Injuries to the tibial collateral ligament 
can be part of a so called “unhappy triad” that also 
involves tears of the medial meniscus and the anterior 
cruciate ligament.
The spectrum of injuries to collateral ligaments of the 
knee range from minor sprains where the ligaments are 
slightly stretched, but still able to stabilize the knee joint, 
to full thickness tears where all fibers are torn and the 
ligaments lose their stabilizing function.

=== PAGE 624 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
607
In the clinic
Degenerative joint disease/osteoarthritis
Degenerative joint disease occurs throughout many joints 
within the body. Articular degeneration may result from an 
abnormal force across the joint with a normal cartilage or a 
normal force with abnormal cartilage.
Typically degenerative joint disease occurs in synovial 
joints and the process is called osteoarthritis. In the joints 
where osteoarthritis occurs the cartilage and bony tissues 
are usually involved, with limited change within the synovial 
membrane. The typical findings include reduction in the 
joint space, eburnation (joint sclerosis), osteophytosis (small 
bony outgrowths), and bony cyst formation. As the disease 
progresses the joint may become malaligned, its movement 
may become severely limited, and there may be significant 
pain.
The commonest sites for osteoarthritis include the small 
joints of the hands and wrist, and in the lower limb, the hip 
and knee are typically affected, though the tarsometatarsal 
and metatarsophalangeal articulations may undergo similar 
changes.
The etiology of degenerative joint disease is unclear, but 
there are some associations, including genetic 
predisposition, increasing age (males tend to be affected 
younger than females), overuse or underuse of joints, and 
nutritional and metabolic abnormalities. Further factors 
include joint trauma and pre-existing articular disease or 
deformity.
The histological findings of osteoarthritis consist of 
degenerative changes within the cartilage and the 
subchondral bone. Further articular damage worsens these 
changes, which promote further abnormal stresses upon the 
joint. As the disease progresses the typical finding is pain, 
which is usually worse on rising from bed and at the end of 
a day’s activity. Commonly it is aggravated by the extremes 
of movement or unaccustomed exertion. Stiffness and 
limitation of movement may ensue.
Treatment in the first instance includes alteration of 
lifestyle to prevent pain and simple analgesia. As symptoms 
progress a joint replacement may be necessary, but although 
joint replacement appears to be the panacea for 
degenerative joint disease, it is not without risks and 
complications, which include infection and failure in the 
short and long term.
In the clinic
Cruciate ligament injuries
The anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is most frequently 
injured during non-contact activities when there is a sudden 
change in the direction of movement (cutting or pivoting) 
(Fig. 6.81). Contact sports may also result in ACL injury due 
to sudden twisting, hyperextension, and valgus force related 
to direct collision. The injury usually affects the mid-portion 
of the ligament and manifests itself as a complete or partial 
discontinuity of the fibers or abnormal orientation and 
contour of the ligament. With an acute ACL tear, a sudden 
click or pop can be heard and the knee becomes rapidly 
swollen. Several tests are used to clinically assess the injury, 
and the diagnosis is usually confirmed by MRI. A full 
thickness ACL tear causes instability of the knee joint. The 
treatment depends on the desired level of activity of the 
patient. In those with high activity levels, surgical 
reconstruction of the ligament is required. Those with low 
activity levels may opt for knee bracing and physiotherapy; 
however, in the long term the internal damage to the knee 
leads to the development of early osteoarthritis.
A tear to the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) requires 
significant force, so it rarely occurs in isolation. It usually 
occurs during hyperextension of the knee or as a result of a 
direct blow to a bent knee such as when striking the knee 
against the dashboard in a motor vehicle accident. Typically, 
the injury presents as posterior displacement of the tibia on 
physical examination (the so called tibial sag sign). Patients 
complain of knee pain and swelling, inability to bear weight, 
and instability. The diagnosis is confirmed on MRI. The 
management, as in ACL injury, depends on the degree of the 
injury (sprain, partial thickness, full thickness) and the level 
of desired activity.
Fig. 6.81  Sagittal MRI of knee joint showing rupture of the 
anterior cruciate ligament. 
ACL rupture

=== PAGE 625 ===
Lower Limb
608
In the clinic
Examination of the knee joint
It is important to establish the nature of the patient’s 
complaint before any examination. The history should 
include information about the complaint, the signs and 
symptoms, and the patient’s lifestyle (level of activity). This 
history may give a significant clue to the type of injury and 
the likely findings on clinical examination, for example, if the 
patient was kicked around the medial aspect of the knee, a 
valgus deformity injury to the tibial collateral ligament might 
be suspected.
The examination should include assessment in the erect 
position, while walking, and on the couch. The affected side 
must be compared with the unaffected side.
There are many tests and techniques for examining the 
knee joint, including the following.
Tests for anterior instability
■	 Lachman’s test—the patient lies on the couch. The 
examiner places one hand around the distal femur and 
the other around the proximal tibia and then elevates the 
knee, producing 20° of flexion. The patient’s heel rests 
on the couch. The examiner’s thumb must be on the 
tibial tuberosity. The hand on the tibia applies a brisk 
anteriorly directed force. If the movement of the tibia on 
the femur comes to a sudden stop, it is a firm endpoint. If 
it does not come to a sudden stop, the endpoint is 
described as soft and is associated with a tear of the 
anterior cruciate ligament.
■	 Anterior drawer test—a positive anterior drawer test is 
when the proximal head of a patient’s tibia can be pulled 
anteriorly on the femur. The patient lies supine on the 
couch. The knee is flexed to 90° and the heel and sole of 
the foot are placed on the couch. The examiner sits 
gently on the patient’s foot, which has been placed in a 
neutral position. The index fingers are used to check that 
the hamstrings are relaxed while the other fingers 
encircle the upper end of the tibia and pull the tibia. If 
the tibia moves forward, the anterior cruciate ligament is 
torn. Other peripheral structures, such as the medial 
meniscus or meniscotibial ligaments, must also be 
damaged to elicit this sign.
■	 Pivot shift test—there are many variations of this test. 
The patient’s foot is wedged between the examiner’s 
body and elbow. The examiner places one hand flat 
under the tibia pushing it forward with the knee in 
extension. The other hand is placed against the patient’s 
thigh pushing it the other way. The lower limb is taken 
into slight abduction by the examiner’s elbow with the 
examiner’s body acting as a fulcrum to produce the 
valgus. The examiner maintains the anterior tibial 
translation and the valgus and initiates flexion of the 
patient’s knee. At about 20°–30° the pivot shift will occur 
as the lateral tibial plateau reduces. This test 
demonstrates damage to the posterolateral corner of the 
knee joint and the anterior cruciate ligament.
Tests for posterior instability
■	 Posterior drawer test—a positive posterior drawer test 
occurs when the proximal head of a patient’s tibia can be 
pushed posteriorly on the femur. The patient is placed in 
a supine position and the knee is flexed to approximately 
90° with the foot in the neutral position. The examiner 
sits gently on the patient’s foot placing both thumbs on 
the tibial tuberosity and pushing the tibia backward. If 
the tibial plateau moves, the posterior cruciate ligament 
is torn.
Assessment of other structures of the knee
■	 Assessment of the tibial collateral ligament can be 
performed by placing a valgus stress on the knee.
■	 Assessment of lateral and posterolateral knee structures 
requires more complex clinical testing.
The knee will also be assessed for:
■	 joint line tenderness,
■	 patellofemoral movement and instability,
■	 presence of an effusion,
■	 muscle injury, and
■	 popliteal fossa masses.
Further investigations
After the clinical examination has been carried out, further 
investigations usually include plain radiography and possibly 
magnetic resonance imaging, which allows the radiologist to 
assess the menisci, cruciate ligaments, collateral ligaments, 
bony and cartilaginous surfaces, and soft tissues.
Arthroscopy may be carried out and damage to any 
internal structures repaired or trimmed. An arthroscope is a 
small camera that is placed into the knee joint through the 
anterolateral or anteromedial aspect of the knee joint. The 
joint is filled with a saline solution and the telescope is 
manipulated around the knee joint to assess the cruciate 
ligaments, menisci, and cartilaginous surfaces.

=== PAGE 626 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
609
In the clinic
Anterolateral ligament of the knee
A ligament associated at its origin with the fibular collateral 
ligament of the knee has been described. This ligament 
(anterolateral ligament of the knee) courses from the lateral 
femoral epicondyle to the anterolateral region of the 
proximal end of the tibia and may control internal rotation of 
the tibia. (J Anat 2013;223:321–328)
Fibular
collateral
ligament
Anterolateral
ligament
of knee
Iliotibial tract
Tibiofibular joint
The small proximal tibiofibular joint is synovial in type and 
allows very little movement (Fig. 6.82). The opposing joint 
surfaces, on the undersurface of the lateral condyle of the 
tibia and on the superomedial surface of the head of the 
fibula, are flat and circular. The capsule is reinforced by 
anterior and posterior ligaments.
Popliteal fossa
The popliteal fossa is an important area of transition 
between the thigh and leg and is the major route by which 
structures pass from one region to the other.
The popliteal fossa is a diamond-shaped space behind 
the knee joint formed between muscles in the posterior 
compartments of the thigh and leg (Fig. 6.83A):
■	 The margins of the upper part of the diamond are 
formed medially by the distal ends of the semitendinosus 
and semimembranosus muscles and laterally by the 
distal end of the biceps femoris muscle.
■	 The margins of the smaller lower part of the space are 
formed medially by the medial head of the gastrocne­
mius muscle and laterally by the plantaris muscle and 
the lateral head of the gastrocnemius muscle.
■	 The floor of the fossa is formed by the capsule of the 
knee joint and adjacent surfaces of the femur and tibia, 
and, more inferiorly, by the popliteus muscle.
■	 The roof is formed by deep fascia, which is continuous 
above with the fascia lata of the thigh and below with 
deep fascia of the leg.
Fig. 6.82  Tibiofibular joint. 
Fibular collateral
ligament
Interosseous
membrane
Anterior ligament
of joint
Proximal
tibiofibular joint

=== PAGE 627 ===
Lower Limb
610
A
B
C
Linea aspera
Biceps femoris muscle
(short head)
Biceps femoris
muscle
(long head)
Popliteal
fossa
Plantaris
muscle
Lateral head of
gastrocnemius
muscle
Popliteus
muscle
Medial head of
gastrocnemius
muscle
Semitendinosus
muscle
Semimembranosus muscle
Adductor
hiatus
Adductor magnus muscle
Sciatic nerve
Tibial nerve
Small
saphenous
vein
Small
saphenous
vein
Common
fibular nerve
Popliteal artery
Popliteal vein
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Posterior
cutaneous
nerve of thigh
Posterior
cutaneous
nerve of thigh
Lateral
Nerve
Vein
Artery
Medial
Fig. 6.83  Popliteal fossa. A. Boundaries. B. Nerves and vessels. C. Superficial structures. 

=== PAGE 628 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
611
of the leg where it ends just lateral to the midline of 
the leg by dividing into the anterior and posterior tibial 
arteries.
The popliteal artery is the deepest of the neurovascular 
structures in the popliteal fossa and is therefore difficult to 
palpate; however, a pulse can usually be detected by deep 
palpation near the midline.
In the popliteal fossa, the popliteal artery gives rise to 
branches, which supply adjacent muscles, and to a series 
of geniculate arteries, which contribute to vascular anas­
tomoses around the knee.
The popliteal vein is superficial to and travels with the 
popliteal artery. It exits the popliteal fossa superiorly to 
become the femoral vein by passing through the adductor 
hiatus.
Roof of popliteal fossa
The roof of the popliteal fossa is covered by superficial 
fascia and skin (Fig. 6.83C). The most important struc­
ture in the superficial fascia is the small saphenous 
vein. This vessel ascends vertically in the superficial 
fascia on the back of the leg from the lateral side of the 
dorsal venous arch in the foot. It ascends to the back 
of the knee where it penetrates deep fascia, which 
forms the roof of the popliteal fossa, and joins with the 
popliteal vein.
One other structure that passes through the roof of the 
fossa is the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh, which 
descends through the thigh superficial to the hamstring 
muscles, passes through the roof of the popliteal fossa, 
and then continues inferiorly with the small saphenous 
vein to innervate skin on the upper half of the back of 
the leg.
Contents
The major contents of the popliteal fossa are the popliteal 
artery, the popliteal vein, and the tibial and common fibular 
nerves (Fig. 6.83B).
Tibial and common fibular nerves
The tibial and common fibular nerves originate proximal 
to the popliteal fossa as the two major branches of the 
sciatic nerve. They are the most superficial of the neuro­
vascular structures in the popliteal fossa and enter the 
region directly from above under the margin of the biceps 
femoris muscle:
■	 The tibial nerve descends vertically through the popli­
teal fossa and exits deep to the margin of the plantaris 
muscle to enter the posterior compartment of the leg.
■	 The common fibular nerve exits by following the 
biceps femoris tendon over the lower lateral margin 
of the popliteal fossa, and continues to the lateral 
side of the leg where it swings around the neck of 
the fibula and enters the lateral compartment of 
the leg.
Popliteal artery and vein
The popliteal artery is the continuation of the femoral 
artery in the anterior compartment of the thigh, and 
begins as the femoral artery passes posteriorly through the 
adductor hiatus in the adductor magnus muscle.
The popliteal artery appears in the popliteal fossa on 
the upper medial side under the margin of the semimem­
branosus muscle. It descends obliquely through the fossa 
with the tibial nerve and enters the posterior compartment 
In the clinic
Popliteal artery aneurysm
The popliteal artery can become abnormally dilated, forming 
an aneurysm. The artery is considered aneurysmal when its 
diameter exceeds 7 mm. Although popliteal artery 
aneurysms can occur in isolation, they are most commonly 
associated with aneurysms in other large vessels such as the 
femoral artery or the thoracic or abdominal aorta. Therefore, 
once a popliteal aneurysm has been detected, the entire 
arterial tree needs to be investigated for the presence of 
coexisting aneurysms elsewhere in the body.
Popliteal artery aneurysms tend to undergo thrombosis 
and are less likely to rupture than other aneurysms. 
Therefore the complications are mainly related to distal 
embolization of the arterial tree and lower limb ischemia, 
which in the most severe cases can lead to leg amputation.
Ultrasound with duplex Doppler is the most helpful way 
of diagnosing a popliteal artery aneurysm because it can 
demonstrate abnormal dilation of the artery, confirm or rule 
out thrombus within the aneurysm, and help distinguish it 
from other masses of the popliteal fossa such as a synovial 
cyst (Baker’s cyst). Popliteal artery aneurysms are usually 
repaired surgically in view of high risk of thromboembolic 
complications.

=== PAGE 629 ===
Lower Limb
612
fibrous joint and forms the lateral malleolus of the ankle 
joint.
The tibia is the weight-bearing bone of the leg and is 
therefore much larger than the fibula. Above, it takes part 
in the formation of the knee joint and below it forms the 
medial malleolus and most of the bony surface for articula­
tion of the leg with the foot at the ankle joint.
The leg is divided into anterior (extensor), posterior 
(flexor), and lateral (fibular) compartments by:
■	 an interosseous membrane, which links adjacent 
borders of the tibia and fibula along most of their length;
■	 two intermuscular septa, which pass between the fibula 
and deep fascia surrounding the limb; and
■	 direct attachment of the deep fascia to the perios­
teum of the anterior and medial borders of the tibia 
(Fig. 6.84).
Muscles in the anterior compartment of the leg dorsiflex 
the ankle, extend the toes, and invert the foot. Muscles in 
the posterior compartment plantarflex the ankle, flex the 
toes, and invert the foot. Muscles in the lateral compart­
ment evert the foot. Major nerves and vessels supply or pass 
through each compartment.
Bones
Shaft and distal end of tibia
The shaft of the tibia is triangular in cross section and has 
anterior, interosseous, and medial borders and medial, 
lateral, and posterior surfaces (Fig. 6.85):
■	 The anterior and medial borders and the entire medial 
surface are subcutaneous and easily palpable.
■	 The interosseous border of the tibia is connected, by the 
interosseous membrane, along its length to the interos­
seous border of the fibula.
■	 The posterior surface is marked by an oblique line (the 
soleal line).
The soleal line descends across the bone from the lateral 
side to the medial side where it merges with the medial 
border. In addition, a vertical line descends down the upper 
part of the posterior surface from the midpoint of the soleal 
line. It disappears in the lower one-third of the tibia.
The shaft of the tibia expands at both the upper and 
lower ends to support the body’s weight at the knee and 
ankle joints.
The distal end of the tibia is shaped like a rectangular 
box with a bony protuberance on the medial side (the 
medial malleolus; Fig. 6.81). The upper part of the box 
is continuous with the shaft of the tibia while the lower 
LEG
The leg is that part of the lower limb between the knee joint 
and ankle joint (Fig. 6.84):
■	 Proximally, most major structures pass between the 
thigh and leg through or in relation to the popliteal fossa 
behind the knee.
■	 Distally, structures pass between the leg and foot mainly 
through the tarsal tunnel on the posteromedial side of 
the ankle, the exceptions being the anterior tibial artery 
and the ends of the deep and superficial fibular nerves, 
which enter the foot anterior to the ankle.
The bony framework of the leg consists of two bones, 
the tibia and fibula, arranged in parallel.
The fibula is much smaller than the tibia and is on the 
lateral side of the leg. It articulates superiorly with the 
inferior aspect of the lateral condyle of the proximal tibia, 
but does not take part in formation of the knee joint. The 
distal end of the fibula is firmly anchored to the tibia by a 
Fig. 6.84  Posterior view of leg; cross section through the left leg 
(inset). 
Interosseous
membrane
Anterior
compartment
of leg
Lateral
compartment
of leg
Anterior and
posterior
intermuscular
septa
Posterior
compartment
of leg
Deep fascia
Anterior
Medial
Leg
Medial malleolus
Ankle joint
Tarsal tunnel
Lateral
malleolus
Tibia
Fibula
Knee joint
Popliteal
fossa

=== PAGE 630 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
613
Like the tibia, the shaft of the fibula is triangular in 
cross section and has three borders and three surfaces for 
the attachment of muscles, intermuscular septa, and liga­
ments (Fig. 6.85). The interosseous border of the fibula 
faces and is attached to the interosseous border of the tibia 
by the interosseous membrane. Intermuscular septa attach 
to the anterior and posterior borders. Muscles attach to the 
three surfaces.
The narrow medial surface faces the anterior com­
partment of the leg, the lateral surface faces the lateral 
compartment of the leg, and the posterior surface faces 
the posterior compartment of the leg.
The posterior surface is marked by a vertical crest 
(medial crest), which divides the posterior surface into 
two parts each attached to a different deep flexor muscle.
The distal end of the fibula expands to form the spade-
shaped lateral malleolus (Fig. 6.85).
surface and the medial malleolus articulate with one of the 
tarsal bones (talus) to form a large part of the ankle joint.
The posterior surface of the box-like distal end of the 
tibia is marked by a vertical groove, which continues infe­
riorly and medially onto the posterior surface of the medial 
malleolus. The groove is for the tendon of the tibialis pos­
terior muscle.
The lateral surface of the distal end of the tibia is occu­
pied by a deep triangular notch (the fibular notch), to 
which the distal head of the fibula is anchored by a thick­
ened part of the interosseous membrane.
Shaft and distal end of fibula
The fibula is not involved in weight-bearing. The fibular 
shaft is therefore much narrower than the shaft of the 
tibia. Also, and except for the ends, the fibula is enclosed 
by muscles.
Fig. 6.85  Tibia and fibula. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. C. Cross section through shafts. D. Posteromedial view of distal ends. 
Lateral surface
Lateral
surface
Interosseous
membrane
Interosseous
border
Medial
surface
Anterior
border
Medial
border
Posterior
border
Posterior surface
Posterior surface
Medial crest
Interosseous border
Interosseous
border
Medial
surface
Anterior
border
Anterior
border
Groove for fibularis longus 
and brevis muscles
Roughened triangular
area that fits into
fibular groove of tibia
A
B
C
D
Fibula
Tibia
Fibular groove
on tibia
Soleal line
Articular surfaces for talus
Medial malleolus
Groove for tendon of
tibialis posterior muscle
Malleolar fossa
Lateral
malleolus
Lateral malleolus

=== PAGE 631 ===
Lower Limb
614
interosseous border of the tibia to the interosseous border 
of the fibula, except superiorly where there is a ligamentous 
band, which ascends from the tibia to fibula.
There are two apertures in the interosseous membrane, 
one at the top and the other at the bottom, for vessels to 
pass between the anterior and posterior compartments 
of the leg.
The interosseous membrane not only links the tibia and 
fibula together, but also provides an increased surface area 
for muscle attachment.
The distal ends of the fibula and tibia are held together 
by the inferior aspect of the interosseous membrane, which 
spans the narrow space between the fibular notch on the 
lateral surface of the distal end of the tibia and the cor­
responding surface on the distal end of the fibula. This 
expanded end of the interosseous membrane is reinforced 
by anterior and posterior tibiofibular ligaments. This 
firm linking together of the distal ends of the tibia and 
fibula is essential to produce the skeletal framework for 
articulation with the foot at the ankle joint.
The medial surface of the lateral malleolus bears a facet 
for articulation with the lateral surface of the talus, thereby 
forming the lateral part of the ankle joint. Just superior to 
this articular facet is a triangular area, which fits into the 
fibular notch on the distal end of the tibia. Here the tibia 
and fibula are joined together by the distal end of the 
interosseous membrane. Posteroinferior to the facet for 
articulation with the talus is a pit or fossa (the malleolar 
fossa) for the attachment of the posterior talofibular liga­
ment associated with the ankle joint.
The posterior surface of the lateral malleolus is marked 
by a shallow groove for the tendons of the fibularis longus 
and fibularis brevis muscles.
Joints
Interosseous membrane of leg
The interosseous membrane of the leg is a tough fibrous 
sheet of connective tissue that spans the distance between 
facing interosseous borders of the tibial and fibular shafts 
(Fig. 6.86). The collagen fibers descend obliquely from the 
Fig. 6.86  Interosseous membrane. A. Anterior view. B. Posteromedial view. 
Aperture for anterior tibial vessels
A
B
Aperture for perforating branch of fibular artery
Anterior tibiofibular ligament
Interosseous membrane
Interosseous membrane
Posterior tibiofibular ligament

=== PAGE 632 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
615
At the knee, the facing margins of the two heads of the 
gastrocnemius form the lateral and medial borders of the 
lower end of the popliteal fossa.
In the upper leg, the heads of the gastrocnemius combine 
to form a single elongate muscle belly, which forms much 
of the soft tissue bulge identified as the calf.
In the lower leg, the muscle fibers of the gastrocnemius 
converge with those of the deeper soleus muscle to form 
the calcaneal tendon, which attaches to the calcaneus 
(heel) of the foot.
The gastrocnemius plantarflexes the foot at the ankle 
joint and can also flex the leg at the knee joint. It is inner­
vated by the tibial nerve.
Plantaris
The plantaris has a small muscle belly proximally and a 
long thin tendon, which descends through the leg and 
joins the calcaneal tendon (Fig. 6.87). The muscle takes 
origin superiorly from the lower part of the lateral supra­
condylar ridge of the femur and from the oblique popliteal 
ligament associated with the knee joint.
The short spindle-shaped muscle body of the plantaris 
descends medially, deep to the lateral head of the gastroc­
nemius, and forms a thin tendon, which passes between 
the gastrocnemius and soleus muscles and eventually fuses 
with the medial side of the calcaneal tendon near its 
attachment to the calcaneus.
The plantaris contributes to plantarflexion of the foot at 
the ankle joint and flexion of the leg at the knee joint, and 
is innervated by the tibial nerve.
Soleus
The soleus is a large flat muscle under the gastrocnemius 
muscle (Fig. 6.87). It is attached to the proximal ends of 
Posterior compartment of leg
Muscles
Muscles in the posterior (flexor) compartment of the leg are 
organized into two groups, superficial and deep, separated 
by a layer of deep fascia. Generally, the muscles mainly 
plantarflex and invert the foot and flex the toes. All are 
innervated by the tibial nerve.
Superficial group
The superficial group of muscles in the posterior compart­
ment of the leg comprises three muscles—the gastrocne­
mius, plantaris, and soleus (Table 6.6)—all of which insert 
onto the heel (calcaneus) of the foot and plantarflex the 
foot at the ankle joint (Fig. 6.87). As a unit, these muscles 
are large and powerful because they propel the body 
forward off the planted foot during walking and can elevate 
the body upward onto the toes when standing. Two of the 
muscles (gastrocnemius and plantaris) originate on the 
distal end of the femur and can also flex the knee.
Gastrocnemius
The gastrocnemius muscle is the most superficial of the 
muscles in the posterior compartment and is one of the 
largest muscles in the leg (Fig. 6.87). It originates from two 
heads, one lateral and one medial:
■	 The medial head is attached to an elongate roughen­
ing on the posterior aspect of the distal femur just 
behind the adductor tubercle and above the articular 
surface of the medial condyle.
■	 The lateral head originates from a distinct facet on the 
upper lateral surface of the lateral femoral condyle 
where it joins the lateral supracondylar line.
Table 6.6  Superficial group of muscles in the posterior compartment of leg (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating 
the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Gastrocnemius
Medial head—posterior surface of 
distal femur just superior to medial 
condyle; lateral head—upper 
posterolateral surface of lateral 
femoral condyle
Via calcaneal tendon, to 
posterior surface of calcaneus
Tibial nerve (S1, S2)
Plantarflexes foot and 
flexes knee
Plantaris
Inferior part of lateral supracondylar 
line of femur and oblique popliteal 
ligament of knee
Via calcaneal tendon, to 
posterior surface of calcaneus
Tibial nerve (S1, S2)
Plantarflexes foot and 
flexes knee
Soleus
Soleal line and medial border of 
tibia; posterior aspect of fibular head 
and adjacent surfaces of neck and 
proximal shaft; tendinous arch 
between tibial and fibular 
attachments
Via calcaneal tendon, to 
posterior surface of calcaneus
Tibial nerve (S1, S2)
Plantarflexes the foot

=== PAGE 633 ===
Lower Limb
616
Fig. 6.87  Superficial group of muscles in the posterior compartment of leg. A. Posterior view. B. Lateral view. 
A
Plantaris
Medial head of
gastrocnemius
Popliteal vessels and tibial nerve
Ligament spanning distance between
fibular and tibial origins of soleus
Tendon of plantaris
Calcaneal (Achilles) tendon
Calcaneus
Gastrocnemius
Soleus
Lateral head of gastrocnemius
Medial
Lateral
B
Soleus
Calcaneal tendon
Gastrocnemius
Calcaneus

=== PAGE 634 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
617
the fibula and tibia, and to a tendinous ligament, which 
spans the distance between the two heads of attachment 
to the fibula and tibia:
■	 On the proximal end of the fibula, the soleus originates 
from the posterior aspect of the head and adjacent 
surface of the neck and upper shaft of the fibula.
■	 On the tibia, the soleus originates from the soleal line 
and adjacent medial border.
■	 The ligament, which spans the distance between the 
attachments to the tibia and fibula, arches over the 
popliteal vessels and tibial nerve as they pass from the 
popliteal fossa into the deep region of the posterior 
compartment of the leg.
In the lower leg, the soleus muscle narrows to join the 
calcaneal tendon that attaches to the calcaneus.
The soleus muscle, together with the gastrocnemius and 
plantaris, plantarflexes the foot at the ankle joint. It is 
innervated by the tibial nerve.
In the clinic
Calcaneal (Achilles) tendon rupture
Rupture of the calcaneal tendon is often related to sudden 
or direct trauma. This type of injury frequently occurs in a 
normal healthy tendon. In addition, there are certain 
conditions that may predispose the tendon to rupture. 
Among these conditions are tendinopathy (due to 
overuse, or to age-related degenerative changes) and 
previous calcaneal tendon interventions such as injections 
of pharmaceuticals and the use of certain antibiotics 
(quinolone group). The diagnosis of calcaneal tendon 
rupture is relatively straightforward. The patient typically 
complains of “being kicked” or “shot” behind the ankle, 
and clinical examination often reveals a gap in the tendon.
Fig. 6.88  Deep group of muscles in the posterior compartment of 
leg. 
Popliteus
Soleal line
Tibialis
posterior
Origin of
tibialis
posterior
Vertical
line
Flexor
digitorum
longus
Origin of flexor
digitorum longus
Origin of flexor
hallucis longus
Groove on
medial
malleolus
Medial
Tuberosity of
navicular
Medial
cuneiform
Groove on inferior
surface of sustentaculum
tali of calcaneus bone
Groove on posterior
surface of talus
Flexor hallucis
longus
Lateral
Deep group
There are four muscles in the deep posterior compartment 
of the leg (Fig. 6.88)—the popliteus, flexor hallucis longus, 
flexor digitorum longus, and tibialis posterior (Table 6.7). 
The popliteus muscle acts on the knee, whereas the other 
three muscles act mainly on the foot.
Popliteus
The popliteus is the smallest and most superior of the 
deep muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg. It 
unlocks the extended knee at the initiation of flexion and 
stabilizes the knee by resisting lateral (external) rotation of 
the tibia on the femur. It is flat and triangular in shape, 

=== PAGE 635 ===
Lower Limb
618
forms part of the floor of the popliteal fossa (Fig. 6.88), and 
is inserted into a broad triangular region above the soleal 
line on the posterior surface of the tibia.
The popliteus muscle ascends laterally across the lower 
aspect of the knee and originates from a tendon, which 
penetrates the fibrous membrane of the joint capsule of the 
knee. The tendon ascends laterally around the joint where 
it passes between the lateral meniscus and the fibrous 
membrane and then into a groove on the inferolateral 
aspect of the lateral femoral condyle. The tendon attaches 
to and originates from a depression at the anterior end of 
the groove.
When initiating gait from a standing position, contrac­
tion of the popliteus laterally rotates the femur on the fixed 
tibia, unlocking the knee joint. The popliteus muscle is 
innervated by the tibial nerve.
Flexor hallucis longus
The flexor hallucis longus muscle originates on the lateral 
side of the posterior compartment of the leg and inserts 
into the plantar surface of the great toe on the medial side 
of the foot (Fig. 6.88). It arises mainly from the lower two-
thirds of the posterior surface of the fibula and adjacent 
interosseous membrane.
The muscle fibers of the flexor hallucis longus converge 
inferiorly to form a large cord-like tendon, which passes 
behind the distal head of the tibia and then slips into a 
distinct groove on the posterior surface of the adjacent 
tarsal bone (talus) of the foot. The tendon curves anteriorly 
first under the talus and then under a shelf of bone (the 
sustentaculum tali), which projects medially from the cal­
caneus, and then continues anteriorly through the sole of 
the foot to insert on the inferior surface of the base of the 
distal phalanx of the great toe.
Table 6.7  Deep group of muscles in the posterior compartment of leg (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the 
muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Popliteus
Lateral femoral condyle
Posterior surface of 
proximal tibia
Tibial nerve (L4 to S1)
Stabilizes knee joint (resists lateral 
rotation of tibia on femur)
Unlocks knee joint (laterally 
rotates femur on fixed tibia)
Flexor hallucis 
longus
Posterior surface of fibula and 
adjacent interosseous membrane
Plantar surface of distal 
phalanx of great toe
Tibial nerve (S2, S3)
Flexes great toe
Flexor digitorum 
longus
Medial side of posterior surface of 
the tibia
Plantar surfaces of bases of 
distal phalanges of the 
lateral four toes
Tibial nerve (S2, S3)
Flexes lateral four toes
Tibialis posterior
Posterior surfaces of interosseous 
membrane and adjacent regions 
of tibia and fibula
Mainly to tuberosity of 
navicular and adjacent 
region of medial cuneiform
Tibial nerve (L4, L5)
Inversion and plantarflexion of 
foot; support of medial arch of 
foot during walking
The flexor hallucis longus flexes the great toe. It is par­
ticularly active during the toe-off phase of walking when 
the body is propelled forward off the stance leg and the 
great toe is the last part of the foot to leave the ground. It 
can also contribute to plantarflexion of the foot at the 
ankle joint and is innervated by the tibial nerve.
Flexor digitorum longus
The flexor digitorum longus muscle originates on the 
medial side of the posterior compartment of the leg and 
inserts into the lateral four digits of the foot (Fig. 6.88). It 
arises mainly from the medial side of the posterior surface 
of the tibia inferior to the soleal line.
The flexor digitorum longus descends in the leg and 
forms a tendon, which crosses posterior to the tendon of 
the tibialis posterior muscle near the ankle joint. The 
tendon continues inferiorly in a shallow groove behind the 
medial malleolus and then swings forward to enter the sole 
of the foot. It crosses inferior to the tendon of the flexor 
hallucis longus muscle to reach the medial side of the foot 
and then divides into four tendons, which insert on the 
plantar surfaces of the bases of the distal phalanges of 
digits II to V.
The flexor digitorum longus flexes the lateral four toes. 
It is involved with gripping the ground during walking and 
propelling the body forward off the toes at the end of the 
stance phase of gait. It is innervated by the tibial nerve.
Tibialis posterior
The tibialis posterior muscle originates from the interosse­
ous membrane and the adjacent posterior surfaces of the 
tibia and fibula (Fig. 6.88). It lies between and is overlapped 
by the flexor digitorum longus and the flexor hallucis 
longus muscles.

=== PAGE 636 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
619
of the foot to attach to the plantar surfaces of the medial 
tarsal bones, mainly to the tuberosity of the navicular and 
to the adjacent region of the medial cuneiform.
The tibialis posterior inverts and plantarflexes the foot, 
and supports the medial arch of the foot during walking. 
It is innervated by the tibial nerve.
Near the ankle, the tendon of the tibialis posterior is 
crossed superficially by the tendon of the flexor digitorum 
longus muscle and lies medial to this tendon in the groove 
on the posterior surface of the medial malleolus. The tendon 
curves forward under the medial malleolus and enters the 
medial side of the foot. It wraps around the medial margin 
In the clinic
Neurological examination of the legs
Some of the commonest conditions that affect the legs are 
peripheral neuropathy (particularly associated with diabetes 
mellitus), lumbar nerve root lesions (associated with 
pathology of the intervertebral discs), fibular nerve palsy, 
and spastic paraparesis.
■	 Look for muscle wasting—loss of muscle mass may 
indicate loss of or reduced innervation.
■	 Test the power in muscle groups—hip flexion (L1, 
L2—iliopsoas—straight leg raise); knee flexion (L5 to 
S2—hamstrings—the patient tries to bend the knee 
while the examiner applies force to the leg to hold the 
knee in extension); knee extension (L3, L4—quadriceps 
femoris—the patient attempts to keep the leg straight 
while the examiner applies a force to the leg to flex the 
knee joint); ankle plantarflexion (S1, S2—the patient 
pushes the foot down while the examiner applies a force 
to the plantar surface of the foot to dorsiflex the ankle 
joint); ankle dorsiflexion (L4, L5—the patient pulls the 
foot upward while the examiner applies a force to the 
dorsal aspect of the foot to plantarflex the ankle joint).
■	 Examine knee and ankle reflexes—a tap with a tendon 
hammer on the patellar ligament (tendon) tests reflexes 
at the L3–L4 spinal levels, and tapping the calcaneal 
tendon tests reflexes at the S1–S2 spinal levels.
■	 Assess status of general sensory input to lumbar and 
upper sacral spinal cord levels—test light touch, pin prick, 
and vibration sense at dermatomes in the lower limb.

=== PAGE 637 ===
Lower Limb
620
Fig. 6.89  Arteries in the posterior compartment of leg. 
Adductor hiatus
Superior medial
genicular artery
Superior lateral
genicular artery
Adductor
magnus muscle
Popliteal artery
Sural arteries
Medial head of
gastrocnemius
muscle 
Popliteus muscle
Posterior tibial artery
Posterior tibial artery
Perforating terminal
branch of fibular artery
Branches that
perforate intermuscular
septum to enter lateral
compartment
Fibular artery
Circumflex
fibular artery
Anterior tibial artery
(passes through
aperture in
interosseous
membrane)
Popliteal vein
Arteries
Popliteal artery
The popliteal artery is the major blood supply to the leg 
and foot and enters the posterior compartment of the leg 
from the popliteal fossa behind the knee (Fig. 6.89).
The popliteal artery passes into the posterior compart­
ment of the leg between the gastrocnemius and popliteus 
muscles. As it continues inferiorly it passes under the ten­
dinous arch formed between the fibular and tibial heads of 
the soleus muscle and enters the deep region of the poste­
rior compartment of the leg where it immediately divides 
into an anterior tibial artery and a posterior tibial artery.
Two large sural arteries, one on each side, branch from 
the popliteal artery to supply the gastrocnemius, soleus, 
and plantaris muscles (Fig. 6.89). In addition, the popliteal 
artery gives rise to branches that contribute to a collateral 
network of vessels around the knee joint (see Fig. 6.80).
Anterior tibial artery
The anterior tibial artery passes forward through the 
aperture in the upper part of the interosseous membrane 
and enters and supplies the anterior compartment of the 
leg. It continues inferiorly onto the dorsal aspect of the 
foot.
Posterior tibial artery
The posterior tibial artery supplies the posterior and 
lateral compartments of the leg and continues into the sole 
of the foot (Fig. 6.89).
The posterior tibial artery descends through the deep 
region of the posterior compartment of the leg on the 
superficial surfaces of the tibialis posterior and flexor digi­
torum longus muscles. It passes through the tarsal tunnel 
behind the medial malleolus and into the sole of the foot.
In the leg, the posterior tibial artery supplies adjacent 
muscles and bone and has two major branches, the cir­
cumflex fibular artery and the fibular artery:
■	 The circumflex fibular artery passes laterally through 
the soleus muscle and around the neck of the fibula to 
connect with the anastomotic network of vessels sur­
rounding the knee (Fig. 6.89; see also Fig. 6.80).
■	 The fibular artery parallels the course of the tibial 
artery, but descends along the lateral side of the poste­
rior compartment adjacent to the medial crest on the 
posterior surface of the fibula, which separates the 
attachments of the tibialis posterior and flexor hallucis 
longus muscles.
The fibular artery supplies adjacent muscles and 
bone in the posterior compartment of the leg and also has 

=== PAGE 638 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
621
Fig. 6.90  Tibial nerve. A. Posterior view. B. Sural nerve. 
Adductor
hiatus
Tibial nerve
Medial
calcaneal
nerve
Common
fibular nerve
Sciatic nerve
A
B
Sural nerve
Sural nerve
Penetrates
deep fascia
branches that pass laterally through the intermuscular 
septum to supply the fibularis muscles in the lateral com­
partment of the leg.
A perforating branch that originates from the fibular 
artery distally in the leg passes anteriorly through the 
inferior aperture in the interosseous membrane to anasto­
mose with a branch of the anterior tibial artery.
The fibular artery passes behind the attachment 
between the distal ends of the tibia and fibula and termi­
nates in a network of vessels over the lateral surface of the 
calcaneus.
Veins
Deep veins in the posterior compartment generally follow 
the arteries.
Nerves
Tibial nerve
The nerve associated with the posterior compartment of 
the leg is the tibial nerve (Fig. 6.90), a major branch of the 
sciatic nerve that descends into the posterior compartment 
from the popliteal fossa.
The tibial nerve passes under the tendinous arch formed 
between the fibular and tibial heads of the soleus muscle 
and passes vertically through the deep region of the poste­
rior compartment of the leg on the surface of the tibialis 
posterior muscle with the posterior tibial vessels.
The tibial nerve leaves the posterior compartment of the 
leg at the ankle by passing through the tarsal tunnel behind 
the medial malleolus. It enters the foot to supply most 
intrinsic muscles and skin.
In the leg, the tibial nerve gives rise to:
■	 branches that supply all the muscles in the posterior 
compartment of the leg, and
■	 two cutaneous branches, the sural nerve and medial 
calcaneal nerve.

=== PAGE 639 ===
Lower Limb
622
Branches of the tibial nerve that innervate the superfi­
cial group of muscles of the posterior compartment and 
popliteus muscle of the deep group originate high in the 
leg between the two heads of the gastrocnemius muscle in 
the distal region of the popliteal fossa (Fig. 6.91). Branches 
innervate the gastrocnemius, plantaris, and soleus muscles, 
and pass more deeply into the popliteus muscle.
Branches to the deep muscles of the posterior compart­
ment originate from the tibial nerve deep to the soleus 
muscle in the upper half of the leg and innervate the tibi­
alis posterior, flexor hallucis longus, and flexor digitorum 
longus muscles.
Sural nerve
The sural nerve originates high in the leg between the two 
heads of the gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 6.90). It descends 
superficial to the belly of the gastrocnemius muscle and 
penetrates through the deep fascia approximately in the 
middle of the leg where it is joined by a sural communicat­
ing branch from the common fibular nerve. It passes down 
the leg, around the lateral malleolus, and into the foot.
The sural nerve supplies skin on the lower posterolat­
eral surface of the leg and the lateral side of the foot and 
little toe.
Medial calcaneal nerve
The medial calcaneal nerve is often multiple and originates 
from the tibial nerve low in the leg near the ankle and 
descends onto the medial side of the heel.
The medial calcaneal nerve innervates skin on the 
medial surface and sole of the heel (Fig. 6.90).
Lateral compartment of leg
Muscles
There are two muscles in the lateral compartment of the 
leg—the fibularis longus and fibularis brevis (Fig. 6.91 and 
Table 6.8). Both evert the foot (turn the sole outward) and 
are innervated by the superficial fibular nerve, which is a 
branch of the common fibular nerve.
Fig. 6.91  Muscles in the lateral compartment of leg. A. Lateral 
view. B. Inferior view of the right foot, with the foot plantarflexed 
at the ankle. 
A
B
Common fibular nerve
Fibularis
longus
Fibularis
brevis
Fibular trochlea
of calcaneus bone
Anterior
border of fibula
Interosseous
membrane
Medial
cuneiform
Metatarsal I
Groove on
inferior aspect
of cuboid
Fibularis
brevis
tendon
Fibularis
longus
tendon
Table 6.8  Muscles of the lateral compartment of leg (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Fibularis longus
Upper lateral surface of fibula, 
head of fibula, and occasionally 
the lateral tibial condyle
Undersurface of lateral sides of 
distal end of medial cuneiform 
and base of metatarsal I
Superficial fibular 
nerve (L5, S1, S2)
Eversion and plantarflexion 
of foot; supports arches 
of foot
Fibularis brevis
Lower two-thirds of lateral 
surface of shaft of fibula
Lateral tubercle at base of 
metatarsal V
Superficial fibular 
nerve (L5, S1, S2)
Eversion of foot
Fibularis longus
The fibularis longus muscle arises in the lateral compart­
ment of the leg, but its tendon crosses under the foot to 
attach to bones on the medial side (Fig. 6.91). It originates 
from both the upper lateral surface of the fibula and from 

=== PAGE 640 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
623
the anterior aspect of the fibular head and occasionally up 
onto the adjacent region of the lateral tibial condyle.
The common fibular nerve passes anteriorly around the 
fibular neck between the attachments of the fibularis 
longus to the fibular head and shaft.
Distally, the fibularis longus descends in the leg to form 
a tendon, which, in order:
■	 passes posterior to the lateral malleolus in a shallow 
bony groove,
■	 swings forward to enter the lateral side of the foot,
■	 descends obliquely down the lateral side of the foot 
where it curves forward under a bony tubercle (fibular 
trochlea) of the calcaneus,
■	 enters a deep groove on the inferior surface of one of 
the other tarsal bones (the cuboid), and
■	 swings under the foot to cross the sole and attach to the 
inferior surfaces of bones on the medial side of the foot 
(lateral sides of the base of metatarsal I and the distal 
end of the medial cuneiform).
The fibularis longus everts and plantarflexes the foot. 
In addition, the fibularis longus, tibialis anterior, and 
tibialis posterior muscles, which all insert on the under­
surfaces of bones on the medial side of the foot, together 
act as a stirrup to support the arches of the foot. The 
fibularis longus supports mainly the lateral and transverse 
arches.
The fibularis longus is innervated by the superficial 
fibular nerve.
Fibularis brevis
The fibularis brevis muscle is deep to the fibularis longus 
muscle in the leg and originates from the lower two-thirds 
of the lateral surface of the shaft of the fibula (Fig. 6.91).
The tendon of the fibularis brevis passes behind the 
lateral malleolus with the tendon of the fibularis longus 
muscle and then curves forward across the lateral surface 
of the calcaneus to attach to a tubercle on the lateral 
surface of the base of metatarsal V (the metatarsal associ­
ated with the little toe).
The fibularis brevis assists in eversion of the foot and is 
innervated by the superficial fibular nerve.
Arteries
No major artery passes vertically through the lateral com­
partment of the leg. It is supplied by branches (mainly from 
the fibular artery in the posterior compartment of the leg) 
that penetrate into the lateral compartment (Fig. 6.92).
Veins
Deep veins generally follow the arteries.
Fig. 6.92  Common fibular nerve, and nerves and arteries of the 
lateral compartment of leg. A. Posterior view, right leg. B. Lateral 
view, right leg. 
A
B
Sural communicating nerve
Penetrates deep fascia
Sural nerve
Penetrates deep fascia
Lateral sural nerve
Common fibular nerve
Superficial fibular nerve
Perforating branches of fibular artery
in posterior compartment
(vessels in and around fibula)
Deep fibular
nerve

=== PAGE 641 ===
Lower Limb
624
Nerves
Superficial fibular nerve
The nerve associated with the lateral compartment of the 
leg is the superficial fibular nerve. This nerve originates 
as one of the two major branches of the common fibular 
nerve, which enters the lateral compartment of the leg 
from the popliteal fossa (Fig. 6.92B).
The common fibular nerve originates from the sciatic 
nerve in the posterior compartment of the thigh or in the 
popliteal fossa (Fig. 6.92A), and follows the medial margin 
of the biceps femoris tendon over the lateral head of the 
gastrocnemius muscle and toward the fibula. Here it gives 
origin to two cutaneous branches, which descend in the leg:
■	 the sural communicating nerve, which joins the 
sural branch of the tibial nerve and contributes to 
innervation of skin over the lower posterolateral side of 
the leg; and
■	 the lateral sural cutaneous nerve, which innervates 
skin over the upper lateral leg.
The common fibular nerve continues around the neck 
of the fibula and enters the lateral compartment by passing 
between the attachments of the fibularis longus muscle to 
the head and shaft of the fibula. Here the common fibular 
nerve divides into its two terminal branches:
■	 the superficial fibular nerve, and
■	 the deep fibular nerve.
The superficial fibular nerve descends in the lateral 
compartment deep to the fibularis longus and innervates 
the fibularis longus and fibularis brevis (Fig. 6.91B). It then 
penetrates deep fascia in the lower leg and enters the foot 
where it divides into medial and lateral branches, which 
supply dorsal areas of the foot and toes except for:
■	 the web space between the great and second toes, which 
is supplied by the deep fibular nerve; and
■	 the lateral side of the little toe, which is supplied by the 
sural branch of the tibial nerve.
The deep fibular nerve passes anteromedially through 
the intermuscular septum into the anterior compartment 
of the leg, which it supplies.
Anterior compartment of leg
Muscles
There are four muscles in the anterior compartment of 
the leg—the tibialis anterior, extensor hallucis longus, 
extensor digitorum longus, and fibularis tertius (Fig. 6.93 
Fig. 6.93  Muscles of the anterior compartment of leg. 
Anterior surface
of fibula
Extensor
digitorum
longus
Origin of extensor
digitorum longus
Lateral surface
of fibula
Extensor hallucis longus
Origin of extensor
hallucis longus
Fibularis
tertius
Attachment to inferior 
surface of medial cuneiform 
and metatarsal I
Subcutaneous
surface of tibia
Tibialis
anterior
Origin of tibialis
anterior
and Table 6.9). Collectively they dorsiflex the foot at the 
ankle joint, extend the toes, and invert the foot. All are 
innervated by the deep fibular nerve, which is a branch of 
the common fibular nerve.
Tibialis anterior
The tibialis anterior muscle is the most anterior and 
medial of the muscles in the anterior compartment of the 

=== PAGE 642 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Leg
6
625
Table 6.9  Muscles of the anterior compartment of leg (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Tibialis anterior
Lateral surface of tibia and 
adjacent interosseous membrane
Medial and inferior surfaces 
of medial cuneiform and 
adjacent surfaces on base of 
metatarsal I
Deep fibular nerve 
(L4, L5)
Dorsiflexion of foot at ankle 
joint; inversion of foot; 
dynamic support of medial 
arch of foot
Extensor hallucis 
longus
Middle one-half of medial surface 
of fibula and adjacent surface of 
interosseous membrane
Dorsal surface of base of 
distal phalanx of great toe
Deep fibular nerve 
(L5, S1)
Extension of great toe and 
dorsiflexion of foot
Extensor digitorum 
longus
Proximal one-half of medial 
surface of fibula and related 
surface of lateral tibial condyle
Via dorsal digital expansions 
into bases of distal and 
middle phalanges of lateral 
four toes
Deep fibular nerve 
(L5, S1)
Extension of lateral four toes 
and dorsiflexion of foot
Fibularis tertius
Distal part of medial surface of 
fibula
Dorsomedial surface of base 
of metatarsal V
Deep fibular nerve 
(L5, S1)
Dorsiflexion and eversion 
of foot
leg (Fig. 6.93). It originates mainly from the upper two-
thirds of the lateral surface of the shaft of the tibia and 
adjacent surface of the interosseous membrane. It also 
originates from deep fascia.
The muscle fibers of the tibialis anterior converge in the 
lower one-third of the leg to form a tendon, which descends 
into the medial side of the foot, where it attaches to the 
medial and inferior surfaces of one of the tarsal bones 
(medial cuneiform) and adjacent parts of metatarsal I 
associated with the great toe.
The tibialis anterior dorsiflexes the foot at the ankle joint 
and inverts the foot at the intertarsal joints. During 
walking, it provides dynamic support for the medial arch 
of the foot.
The tibialis anterior is innervated by the deep fibular 
nerve.
Extensor hallucis longus
The extensor hallucis longus muscle lies next to and is 
partly overlapped by the tibialis anterior muscle (Fig. 6.93). 
It originates from the middle one-half of the medial surface 
of the fibula and adjacent interosseous membrane.
The tendon of the extensor hallucis longus appears 
between the tendons of the tibialis anterior and extensor 
digitorum longus in the lower one-half of the leg and 
descends into the foot. It continues anteriorly on the medial 
side of the dorsal surface of the foot to near the end of the 
great toe where it inserts on the upper surface of the base 
of the distal phalanx.
The extensor hallucis longus extends the great toe. 
Because it crosses anterior to the ankle joint, it also dorsi­
flexes the foot at the ankle joint. Like all muscles in the 
anterior compartment of the leg, the extensor hallucis 
longus muscle is innervated by the deep fibular nerve.
Extensor digitorum longus
The extensor digitorum longus muscle is the most pos­
terior and lateral of the muscles in the anterior compart­
ment of the leg (Fig. 6.93). It originates mainly from the 
upper one-half of the medial surface of the fibula lateral 
to and above the origin of the extensor hallucis longus 
muscle, and extends superiorly onto the lateral condyle of 
the tibia. Like the tibialis anterior muscle, it also originates 
from deep fascia.
The extensor digitorum longus muscle descends to form 
a tendon, which continues into the dorsal aspect of the 
foot, where it divides into four tendons, which insert, via 
dorsal digital expansions, into the dorsal surfaces of the 
bases of the middle and distal phalanges of the lateral 
four toes.
The extensor digitorum longus extends the toes and 
dorsiflexes the foot at the ankle joint, and is innervated by 
the deep fibular nerve.
Fibularis tertius
The fibularis tertius muscle is normally considered 
part of the extensor digitorum longus (Fig. 6.93). The 
fibularis tertius originates from the medial surface of the 
fibula immediately below the origin of the extensor digito­
rum longus muscle and the two muscles are normally 
connected.
The tendon of the fibularis tertius descends into the foot 
with the tendon of the extensor digitorum longus. On the 
dorsal aspect of the foot, it deviates laterally to insert into 
the dorsomedial surface of the base of metatarsal V (the 
metatarsal associated with the little toe).
The fibularis tertius assists in dorsiflexion and possibly 
eversion of the foot, and is innervated by the deep fibular 
nerve.

=== PAGE 643 ===
Lower Limb
626
Fig. 6.94  Anterior tibial artery and deep fibular nerve. 
Recurrent branch
Anterior tibial artery
Anterior tibial artery
Dorsalis pedis artery
Common
fibular nerve
Superficial
branch
Perforating branch
of fibular artery
Deep fibular nerve
Arteries
Anterior tibial artery
The artery associated with the anterior compartment of the 
leg is the anterior tibial artery, which originates from the 
popliteal artery in the posterior compartment of the leg 
and passes forward into the anterior compartment of 
the leg through an aperture in the interosseous membrane.
The anterior tibial artery descends through the anterior 
compartment on the interosseous membrane (Fig. 6.94). 
In the distal leg, it lies between the tendons of the tibialis 
anterior and extensor hallucis longus muscles. It leaves the 
leg by passing anterior to the distal end of the tibia and 
ankle joint and continues onto the dorsal aspect of the foot 
as the dorsalis pedis artery.
In the proximal leg, the anterior tibial artery has a 
recurrent branch, which connects with the anastomotic 
network of vessels around the knee joint.
Along its course, the anterior tibial artery supplies 
numerous branches to adjacent muscles and is joined by 
the perforating branch of the fibular artery, which passes 
forward through the lower aspect of the interosseous 
membrane from the posterior compartment of the leg.
Distally, the anterior tibial artery gives rise to an ante­
rior medial malleolar artery and an anterior lateral 
malleolar artery, which pass posteriorly around the 
distal ends of the tibia and fibula, respectively, and connect 
with vessels from the posterior tibial and fibular arteries to 
form an anastomotic network around the ankle.
Veins
Deep veins follow the arteries and have similar names.
Nerves
Deep fibular nerve
The nerve associated with the anterior compartment of the 
leg is the deep fibular nerve (Fig. 6.94). This nerve origi­
nates in the lateral compartment of the leg as one of the 
two divisions of the common fibular nerve.
The deep fibular nerve passes anteromedially through 
the intermuscular septum that separates the lateral from 
the anterior compartments of the leg and then passes deep 
to the extensor digitorum longus. It reaches the anterior 
interosseous membrane where it meets and descends with 
the anterior tibial artery.
The deep fibular nerve:
■	 innervates all muscles in the anterior compartment;
■	 then continues into the dorsal aspect of the foot where 
it innervates the extensor digitorum brevis, contributes 
to the innervation of the first two dorsal interossei 
muscles, and supplies the skin between the great and 
second toes.
