=== PAGE 1154 ===
Neuroanatomy
e2
Introduction
Neuroanatomy and neuroscience are fields of science that 
seek to explain embryonic development, structural organiza­
tion, and physiological function of the nervous system. Both 
fields work together to help identify the simple to the most 
complex questions of human sensory, motor, behavioral, 
and higher cognitive functions. The focus of this chapter is 
to introduce the basic structures and functions of the 
individual and systemic components of the human nervous 
system.

=== PAGE 1155 ===
e3
9 
Part I: Nervous System Overview  •  Development
Part I: Nervous system 
overview
Organization of the human nervous system is structurally 
divided into the central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral 
nervous system (PNS) (eFig. 9.1). Components of the CNS 
are the brain and spinal cord, which are enclosed within the 
cranial cavity and vertebral column of the axial skeleton. 
Peripheral nervous system structures include cranial nerves, 
spinal nerves, autonomic nerves, and the enteric nervous 
system.
DEVELOPMENT
During the third week of development the outermost layer 
of the embryo—the ectoderm—thickens to form a neural 
plate (eFig. 9.2A). This plate develops a longitudinally 
running neural groove, which deepens so that it is flanked 
on either side by neural folds (eFig. 9.2B). These folds further 
develop and eventually fuse during a process called neurula­
tion to form a long tubelike structure called the neural tube 
with an inner lumen called the neural canal (eFig. 9.3). Fusion 
of the tube starts at the midpoint and extends cranially and 
caudally so that the tube is fully formed by the fourth week. 
Continued proliferation of the cells at the cephalic end cause 
Brain
Spinal
cord
Peripheral nervous
system (PNS)
Central nervous
system (CNS)
Cranial
nerve
Spinal
nerve
eFig. 9.1  Central nervous system (CNS) and peripheral nervous system (PNS). (From Drake R. Gray’s Anatomy for Students. 3rd ed., Fig. 1.33. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015).

=== PAGE 1156 ===
Neuroanatomy
e4
the neural tube to dilate and form the three primary brain 
vesicles (eFig. 9.4): the prosencephalon (forebrain), mesen­
cephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain), 
which later give rise to the structures of the brain. Caudally, 
the neural tube lengthens and narrows to form the spinal 
cord. The neural canal forms the cavities of the ventricular 
system in the brain and central canal of the spinal cord 
(eTable 9.1). The peripheral nervous system consists of 
cranial nerves, spinal nerves, spinal ganglia, the enteric 
system, and autonomic ganglia. The peripheral nervous 
system is formed by nerve fibers that extend out of the central 
nervous system and by neurons and their fibers that develop 
from migratory neural crest cells (eFig. 9.4A). Like the neural 
tube, neural crest cells originate from surface ectoderm and 
initially lie on each side of the developing CNS.
TERMS OF ORIENTATION
Several terms are used to identify the orientation and location 
of neural structures. The orientation nomenclature is quite 
simple in organisms such as fish and reptiles, which have 
a linear nervous system. For these animals, ventral (Latin 
for “belly”) is oriented toward the ground, dorsal (Latin for 
“back”) toward the sky, rostral (Latin for “beak”) toward 
the snout, and caudal (Latin for “tail) toward the tail (eFig. 
9.5). Because humans are bipedal and maintain an erect 
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Endoderm
Neural fold
Neural canal
Sulcus limitans
eFig. 9.3  Scanning electron micrograph of the just-closing neural 
tube of a chick embryo, fractured at about the level of the future 
midbrain. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 2-2. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; from the cover photograph 
accompanying Schoenwolf GC, Smith JL. Development 109:243, 
1990.)
eTable 9.1  Derivatives of vesicles of the neural tube
Primary vesicle
Secondary 
vesicle
Neural 
derivatives
Cavity
Prosencephalon 
(forebrain)
Telencephalon
Diencephalon
Cerebral 
hemispheres
Thalamus, 
hypothalamus, 
retina, other 
structures
Lateral 
ventricles
Third 
ventricle
Mesencephalon
Mesencephalon
Midbrain
Cerebral 
aqueduct
Rhombencephalon 
(hindbrain)
Metencephalon
Myelencephalon
Pons, 
cerebellum
Medulla
Part of fourth 
ventricle
Part of fourth 
ventricle, part 
of central 
canal
From Vanderah TW. Nolte’s the Human Brain. 7th ed., Table 2.1. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.
A
B
Endoderm
Notochordal
plate
Ectoderm
Ectoderm
Mesoderm
Mesoderm
Notochord
Endoderm
Neural
plate and
groove
Future
neural
crest
Neural
groove
Neural
fold 
Future
neural
crest
18 days
20 days
eFig. 9.2.  Formation of the neural groove from the neural plate (A) near the 18th day of development and (B) 2 days later. (From Nolte J. The 
Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 2-1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; from Arey LB. Developmental Anatomy. 4th ed. Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders; 
1941.)

=== PAGE 1157 ===
e5
9 
Part I: Nervous System Overview  •  Cellular Components
posture, the nervous system makes an obligatory bend of 
80 to 90 degrees at the midbrain–diencephalic junction. 
Because of this, directional references such as ventral, dorsal, 
rostral, and caudal have different meanings along different 
locations of the CNS structures (eFig. 9.6A). An additional 
set of terms that remain constant in their reference to orienta­
tion of nervous system structures are anterior, posterior, 
superior, and inferior.
When studied through imaging or in histopathology, the 
nervous system is observed in sections cut from one of three 
different planes: a coronal plane, which divides the nervous 
system into anterior and posterior parts; the sagittal plane, 
which is oriented at a right angle to the coronal plane and 
divides the nervous system into left and right parts; and a 
horizontal (also referred to as axial or transverse) plane, which 
divides the nervous system into superior and inferior parts 
(eFig. 9.6). Note that a sagittal plane passing through the 
midline may also be referred to as a midsagittal section, 
whereas a section taken just lateral to the midline is referred 
to as a parasagittal section.
CELLULAR COMPONENTS
Nerve cells (neurons) and glial cells are the primary cellular 
components of the nervous system. Neurochemical signaling 
is predominantly carried out through a complex series of 
physiological connections between adjoining neurons. Glial 
cells participate in a constellation of functions that are vital 
for proper brain function. Their historically appreciated 
contribution to neuronal function has expanded to include 
recognition of their role in regulating the content of the 
extracellular space and regulation of neurotransmitters at 
the synaptic junction.
Neurons consist of a cell body (or soma), which contains 
the cell nucleus, short processes called dendrites for receiving 
input from other neurons, and long processes called axons, 
which conduct signals away from the cell body (eTable 9.2). 
Depending on their location, neuronal morphology can be 
quite variable. The majority of mammalian neurons are 
multipolar, indicating that there are several dendrites from 
one end and a single axon that branches extensively at its 
terminus (eFig. 9.7). Some additional neuronal types are 
bipolar, unipolar, and pseudounipolar (eFig. 9.8).
To prevent the loss of linear signal propagation, glial 
cells form a phospholipid-based layer of insulation called 
the myelin sheath along the length of the axon (eFig. 9.7). 
The myelin sheath is formed by oligodendrocytes in the CNS 
and Schwann cells in the PNS. Interspersed between the 
segments of myelin are exposed segments of the axon called 
nodes of Ranvier, which have a large population of voltage-
gated ion channels. Presence of the ion channels facilitates 
A
B
C
Ectoderm
Notochord
Endoderm
Neural
tube
Neural
crest
21 days
22 days
24 days
Somite
Prosencephalon
Mesencephalon
Rhombencephalon
Spinal cord
eFig. 9.4  Closure of the neural tube during week 4. A. On day 21, the neural folds begin fusing at the cervical spinal cord level. B. Fusion of 
the tube continues both rostrally and caudally. C. By the ≈24 day, the rostral end has closed; however, the caudal end will not close for another 
2 to 3 days. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 2-3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; from Arey LB. Developmental Anatomy. 4th ed. 
Philadelphia, PA: W. B. Saunders; 1941.)
Dorsal
Ventral
eFig. 9.5  Directional terms used to reference different parts of the 
CNS. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 6th ed., Fig. 3-1A. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2009

=== PAGE 1158 ===
Neuroanatomy
e6
eTable 9.2  Parts of a typical neuron
Part
Description
Major organelles
Primary functions
Dendrites
Tapered extensions of cell body
Cytoskeleton, mitochondria
Collect information from 
other neurons
Soma (cell body)
May have one, two, or many processes; 
typically one axon, many dendrites
Nucleus, Golgi apparatus, Nissl 
substance, cytoskeleton, mitochondria
Synthesize macromolecules, 
integrate electrical signalsa
Axon
Single, cylindrical; may be many centimeters 
long; may be myelinated or unmyelinated
Cytoskeleton, mitochondria, transport 
vesicles
Conduct information to 
other neurons
Axon terminals 
(synaptic endings)
Vesicle-filled apposition to part of another 
neuron; most are axodendritic or 
axosomatic, but other configurations occur
Synaptic vesicles, mitochondria
Transmit information to 
other neurons
aAs discussed in Chapter 7 of Nolte, the final integration of electrical signals (i.e., conversion of synaptic potentials to trains of action potentials) typically occurs at the 
beginning of the axon.
From Vanderah TW. Nolte’s the Human Brain. 7th ed., Table 1.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.
Thalamus
Corpus callosum
Interventricular foramen
Hypothalamus
Anterior
Posterior
Pineal gland
Superior and
inferior colliculi
Cerebral aqueduct
Cerebellum
Pons
Fourth ventricle
Medulla
Midbrain
Infundibulum
Ventral
Dorsal
eFig. 9.6  Planes of section for the central nervous system. (Modified from Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 1.15A. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1159 ===
e7
9 
Part I: Nervous System Overview  •  Nervous System Functional Organization
rapid conduction of the action potential (a transient voltage 
change in the axonal membrane) from node to node in a 
process called saltatory conduction (eFig. 9.7).
NERVOUS SYSTEM FUNCTIONAL ORGANIZATION
Functionally, the nervous system is organized into a somatic 
nervous system and visceral nervous system. The somatic 
nervous system consists of nerves that carry conscious 
Dendrite
Axon
Synapse
Myelin
sheath
Node of
Ranvier
eFig. 9.7  Schematic of a typical neuron. Synaptic input is predominantly received by the dendrites, and the electrical signal is propagated 
down the axon to synaptic endings. The pink covering on the axon represents the myelin sheath. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 
1-3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
sensation from peripheral regions back to the CNS and nerves 
that exit the CNS to innervate voluntary (skeletal) muscles. 
In contrast, the visceral nervous system consists of nerves 
that carry sensory information into and motor (autonomic) 
innervation out of the CNS to regulate homeostatic functions. 
Further discussion of the somatic and visceral nervous 
systems will be presented within the context of the subse­
quent “Spinal Cord” section.

=== PAGE 1160 ===
Neuroanatomy
e8
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
(Actual size)
eFig. 9.8  Drawings of multipolar (A–E), bipolar (F), and unipolar (G) neurons stained with the Golgi method. Green arrows indicate dendrites, 
and blue arrows indicate axons. All of the neurons are drawn to the same scale to show the different size ranges and shapes of the various 
neurons. A. Purkinje cell found in the cerebellar cortex; B. granule cell found in the cerebellar cortex; C. projection neuron of the inferior olivary 
nucleus; D. motor neuron from the spinal cord motor; E. pyramidal neuron in the cerebral cortex; F. olfactory sensory receptor neurons; G. 
spinal root ganglion cells. The small inset represents the actual size of a pyramidal neuron. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 1-4. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Modified from Ramón y Cajal S. Histologie du système nerveux de l’homme et des vertébrés, Paris: Maloine;1909, 
1911.)

=== PAGE 1161 ===
e9
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Cerebral Hemispheres
Part II: Brain
CEREBRAL HEMISPHERES
Externally, the outer surface of the brain, or cerebral cortex, 
is composed of six layers of cell bodies referred to as gray 
matter. Internally, the myelinated axonal processes of these 
cells extend into the cerebral hemispheres. Because of the 
whitish appearance of these large bundles of myelinated 
axons, they are referred to as white matter. In the brain, 
gray matter is predominantly located on the cortical surface 
and the white matter runs deep inside the cerebral hemi­
spheres; the opposite is true for the spinal cord, where the 
white matter is superficial to the gray matter. Topographically, 
Temporal lobe
Lateral sulcus
Frontal lobe
Occipital lobe
Parietal lobe
Central sulcus
Temporal lobe
Occipital lobe
Parietal lobe
Parieto-
occipital
sulcus
Central sulcus
Frontal lobe
A
B
eFig. 9.9  Four lobes of the brain, right hemisphere. (A) Lateral surface and (B) medial surface. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 
7th ed., Fig. 2.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
the surface of the cerebral hemispheres has a series of eleva­
tions called gyri and infoldings referred to as sulci, both of 
which significantly increase the surface area of the brain.
Structurally, each cerebral hemisphere is divided into four 
major anatomical lobes: frontal, parietal, occipital, and 
temporal (eFig. 9.9A). The frontal lobes are located anteriorly 
and are separated from the more posterior parietal lobe by 
the central sulcus (sulcus of Rolando) (eFig. 9.9A). Laterally, 
the frontal lobe is separated from the temporal lobe by the 
lateral sulcus (fissure of Sylvius). Although there is no specific 
demarcation between the parietal and occipital lobe laterally, 
along the medial aspect of the hemispheres the two lobes 
are separated by the parieto-occipital sulcus (eFig. 9.9B). 
Along the midline, the cerebral hemispheres are separated 

=== PAGE 1162 ===
Neuroanatomy
e10
from one another by the longitudinal fissure (interhemi­
spheric fissure, sagittal fissure). Concealing a small area of 
cortex called the insula laterally are portions of the frontal, 
parietal, and temporal lobes collectively referred to as the 
operculum (Latin for “lid”) (eFig. 9.10). The insula represents 
fusion of the telencephalon and diencephalon and can be 
seen by gently prying open the lateral sulcus.
The path to and from the cerebral cortex is achieved 
through various white matter pathways coursing through 
the spinal cord, brainstem, and cerebral hemispheres. 
Beneath the gray matter of the cortical surface is an expan­
sion of white matter referred to as the corona radiata. This 
white matter pathway condenses to form the internal capsule, 
a V-shaped structure when viewed in horizontal sections 
that contains axons traversing to and from various cortical 
and deep nuclear structures (eFig. 9.11). The internal capsule 
is divided into three parts based on connections to different 
Head of caudate nucleus
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Thalamus
Splenium of corpus callosum
Rostrum of corpus callosum
Anterior limb of internal capsule
Insula
Extreme capsule
External capsule
Claustrum
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Retrolenticular part of
internal capsule
Tail of caudate nucleus
Genu of internal
eFig. 9.11  Horizontal section of the brain exposing the internal capsule. (Modified from Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 13.14. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Parietal operculum
Temporal operculum
Insula
Frontal operculum
eFig. 9.10  Insular cortex visualized with retraction of the opercula. 
(From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 2.3. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1163 ===
e11
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Ventricular System
Precuneus
Lingual gyrus
Parietooccipital sulcus
Cuneus
Calcarine
sulcus
Parahippocampal gyrus
Uncus
Anterior commissure
Middle frontal
gyrus
Thalamus
Septum
pellucidum
Subcallosal
area
Splenium
Paracentral lobule
Corpus callosum
Cingulate gyrus
Genu
Fornix
Body
Central sulcus
eFig. 9.12  Medial view of the corpus callosum in the right cerebral hemisphere. From rostral to caudal: rostrum, genu, body, and splenium. 
(From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 2.2B. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
parts of the cortex and underlying structures. The most 
anterior portion of this white matter pathway is the anterior 
limb, which is bounded medially by the head of the caudate 
and laterally by the globus pallidus and putamen. The 
anterior limb transitions into the genu (Latin for “knee”) 
at the level of the interventricular foramen (of Monro) and 
completes its course as the posterior limb, situated lateral 
to the thalamus and medial to the globus pallidus and 
putamen. In addition to this more vertical stream of axonal 
connections is the horizontally running corpus callosum. 
The corpus callosum (eFig. 9.12) is formed by myelinated 
axons horizontally linking the two cerebral hemispheres to 
one another, and it is divided into a rostrum, genu, body, 
and splenium (eFig. 9.12).
VENTRICULAR SYSTEM
The ventricular system is derived from the inner lumen 
of the developing neural tube. As the brain continues to 
grow, the caverns and canals of the ventricular system adapt 
to the shape of the cerebral hemispheres, diencephalon, pons, 
medulla, and cerebellum, which form the surrounding walls 

=== PAGE 1164 ===
Neuroanatomy
e12
Prosencephalon (Pro)
Mesencephalon (Mes)
Rhombencephalon 
(Rhom)
Telencephalon (Telen)
 and lateral ventricle (LV)
Diencephalon (Dien) and 
third ventricle (ThrV)
Mesencephalon (Mes) and
 cerebral aqueduct (CA)
Cerebellum (Cbl) and pons 
Fourth ventricle (FV)
Myelencephalon (medulla oblongata)
Spinal cord
Telen
Spinal cord and 
central canal
Mes
Rhom
Pro
 Medulla
Telen
 Medulla
Pons 
Pons 
Dien
A
B
D
E
F
FV
CA
FV
Cbl
CA
Mes
ThrV
IF
LV
FV
Cbl
CA
LV
IF
Interventricular foramen (IF)
C
Mes
eFig. 9.13  Development of the caverns and canals of the ventricular system as the cerebral hemispheres continue to grow. Dorsal views (A–C) 
correlate with lateral views (D–F) at 5 weeks (D), 6 weeks (E), and 8.5 weeks (E, F) of gestation. Dashed lines outline the ventricles. (From 
Haines D, Mihailoff G. Fundamental Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications. 5th ed., Fig. 6-1A–C. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2013.)
(eFig. 9.13). Inferior and lateral to the corpus callosum are 
two large, fluid-filled cavities that represent the beginning of 
the ventricular system. These most rostral cavities are the 
two C-shaped lateral ventricles, located within the cerebral 
hemispheres (eFig. 9.14). As the lateral ventricles extend 
through all of the lobes of the cerebral hemispheres, they 
are divided into five named parts. In the frontal lobe is the 
anterior (frontal) horn, which transitions into the body 
within the frontal and parietal lobes (eFig. 9.15). Project­
ing into the occipital lobe is the posterior (occipital) horn 
(eFig. 9.15). A final horn extends inferiorly and anteriorly 
as the inferior (temporal) horn in the temporal lobe (eFig. 
9.15). Near the splenium of the corpus callosum, the body, 
posterior, and inferior horns come together at the atrium/
trigone of the lateral ventricles (eFig. 9.15). Lining most of 
the ventricles is the choroid plexus (eFig. 9.16), a series of 

=== PAGE 1165 ===
e13
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Ventricular System
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle 
Choroid plexus
Cisterna magna
Third ventricle
Interventricular foramen
Septum pellucidum
Stria medullares thalami
Fornix
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Corpus callosum
eFig. 9.14  Sagittal section of the brain exposing the ventricular system within the cerebral hemisphere. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th 
ed., Fig. 6.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Anterior horn of 
lateral ventricle
Atrium
Posterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Posterior horn of 
lateral ventricle
Inferior horn of 
lateral ventricle
Body of 
lateral ventricle
Body of 
lateral ventricle
Interventricular 
foramen
Third ventricle
Cerebral aqueduct
Fourth ventricle
Lateral recess of 
fourth ventricle
(and foramen of Luschka)
A
B
eFig. 9.15  Components of the ventricular system represented by a resin cast. (A) Lateral view; (B) posterior view. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 6.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1166 ===
Neuroanatomy
e14
modified ependymal cells responsible for producing 0.5 L 
of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) a day in adults.
From the lateral ventricles, CSF flows through the inter­
ventricular foramen (of Monro) to the slitlike third ventricle, 
which is surrounded by the thalamus and hypothalamus 
(eFig. 9.15). The third ventricle communicates with the 
fourth ventricle via the cerebral aqueduct (aqueduct of 
Sylvius), which courses through the midbrain (eFig. 9.15). 
Surrounded by the pons and medulla anteriorly and the 
cerebellum posteriorly, the fourth ventricle sends CSF out 
of the ventricular system and into the subarachnoid space 
via the lateral foramina of Luschka and midline foramen 
of Magendie (eFig. 9.15).
MENINGES
Within the bony encasement of the skull and vertebral 
column, the CNS is surrounded by three concentric, con­
nective tissue coverings called meninges (from Greek word 
meninx for “membrane”), which act to support and stabilize 
the brain and spinal cord. The focus of this section will be 
on the cranial meninges. The spinal meninges, which have 
a slightly different configuration, will be discussed in the 
“Spinal Cord” section.
The outermost covering is the dura (Latin for “hard”) 
mater (Latin for “mother”), a tough, fibrous sheet composed 
of two layers. The outer periosteal layer is adherent to the 
skull, and the inner meningeal layer lies against the underly­
ing arachnoid mater (eFig. 9.17). Although these two layers 
are closely adherent to one another, they do separate in 
some regions to form dural venous sinuses, which receive 
cerebral venous drainage (eFig. 9.18). The anatomy of the 
venous sinuses will be discussed in the “Cerebral Vasculature” 
section. Two potential spaces exist as the epidural (extradural) 
space, superficial to the periosteal layer, and subdural space, 
deep to the meningeal dural layer. These spaces can become 
filled with blood during vascular trauma (eTable 9.3). Within 
the cranial cavity, the meningeal layer of dura mater folds in 
on itself in several areas to form dural reflections, or septa. 
These reflections are known as the falx (Latin for “sickle”) 
cerebri between the cerebral hemispheres, as the tentorium 
cerebelli between the cerebral hemispheres and cerebellum, 
Corpus callosum
Interventricular foramen
Thalamus
Choroid plexus
Anterior horn of lateral ventricle
Head of caudate nucleus
eFig. 9.16  Superior dissection of the cerebral hemispheres exposing the corpus callosum and lateral ventricles. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 6.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
eTable 9.3  Spaces in the cranial meninges
Space
Location
Epidural
Potential space between dura and calvaria
Subdural
Potential space in the innermost dural layer, 
near the dura–arachnoid interface
Subarachnoid
Normally present, CSF-filled space; enlarged 
in cisterns
CSF, cerebrospinal fluid.
From Vanderah TW. Nolte’s the Human Brain. 7th ed., Table 4.1. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.

=== PAGE 1167 ===
e15
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Meninges
Intracranial venous structure
(superior sagittal sinus)
Outer periosteal layer of dura mater
Inner meningeal layer of dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Pia mater
Dural partition (falx cerebri)
Skull
Dura mater
Subarachnoid space
eFig. 9.17  Coronal view of the brain and cranial meninges. Note the separation of the inner meningeal and outer periosteal layers of the dura 
mater to form the dural sinuses. (From Drake RL et al: Gray’s Anatomy for Students. 3rd ed., Fig. 8.31A. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Inferior sagittal sinus
Cavernous sinus
Cerebral vein
Optic nerve
Crista galli
Olfactory bulb
Pituitary stalk
Diaphragma sellae
Sphenoparietal
sinus
Superior petrosal sinus
Cerebellum
Great cerebral vein
Tentorium cerebelli
Confluence
of sinuses
Straight sinus
Superior sagittal sinus
Midbrain
eFig. 9.18  Venous sinuses within the dura mater. Note the presence of the midbrain within the tentorial notch. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s 
Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 4-1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1168 ===
Neuroanatomy
e16
Cerebral vein
Diploe
Superior sagittal sinus
Sagittal suture
Epicranial aponeurosis
Scalp vessels
Skin
Emissary vein
Periosteum
Dura mater
Pia mater
Arachnoid
mater
Endosteum
Meningeal
vessels
Falx cerebri
Calloso-
marginal 
artery
Cerebral
cortex
eFig. 9.19  Coronal section of the cranial meninges: dura mater, arachnoid mater, and pia mater. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 4-5A. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
and as the falx cerebelli between the cerebellar hemispheres 
(eFig. 9.17). A smaller reflection, the diaphragm sellae, covers 
the pituitary fossa and underlying pituitary gland.
Deep to the dura mater is the arachnoid (from the Greek 
word arachne meaning “spider’s web”) mater. The outer layer 
of the arachnoid mater is composed of several layers of 
flattened cells that lie adjacent to the meningeal layer of 
the dura mater (eFig. 9.19). Strands of connective tissue 
extend from this outer layer to form arachnoid trabeculae, 
which connect internally to the pia mater (eFig. 9.19). The 
pia mater forms a thin, veil-like layer that closely follows 
the gyri and sulci on the surface of the brain. The pia and 
arachnoid matter are separated by a subarachnoid space 
that contains CSF and the major blood vessels supplying 
the brain.
CEREBRAL VASCULATURE
Vascular supply to the brain is divided into the anterior 
circulation arising from the internal carotid arteries and 
posterior circulation from the vertebral arteries (eFig. 9.20). 
The internal carotid arteries arise from the branching of 
the common carotid arteries at the level of the fourth cervical 
vertebra. Bilaterally the arteries course through the neck 
to enter the middle cranial fossa through the carotid canal. 
The arteries then make a series of turns to pass through 
the petrous portion of the temporal bone and cavernous 
sinus before entering the subarachnoid space just lateral to 
the optic chiasm. Upon exiting the cavernous sinus, the 
internal carotid artery gives rise to the ophthalmic artery 
and then continues superiorly to give off the posterior 
communicating artery and anterior choroidal arteries before 
terminating as the anterior and middle cerebral arteries 
(eFig. 9.21).
The two anterior cerebral arteries anastomose proximally 
via the anterior communicating artery, anterior to the optic 
chiasm (eFig. 9.22). Distal to this connection, the anterior 
cerebral artery (ACA) courses along the medial aspect of 
the cerebral hemisphere within the longitudinal fissure and 
follows the superior border of the corpus callosum to the 

=== PAGE 1169 ===
e17
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Cerebral Vasculature
Anterior cerebral
artery
Cut end of internal
carotid artery
Optic nerve
Posterior communicating
artery
Pontine arteries
Posterior inferior
cerebellar artery
Hypoglossal
nerve roots
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior cerebral
artery
Oculomotor nerve
Superior cerebellar
artery
Basilar artery
Trigeminal nerve
Anterior inferior 
cerebellar artery
Vertebral artery
Anterior spinal artery
eFig. 9.20  Arteries on the inferior surface of the brain injected with red resin. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 7.3. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1170 ===
Neuroanatomy
e18
Callosal artery
ACA
ICA
PCA
Lateral branch (PCA)
Orbitofrontal artery (ACA)
Frontobasal  (MCA)
Anterior temporal artery
Posterior temporal artery
Medial branch (PCA)
Occipitotemporal artery
Calcarine artery
eFig. 9.21  Vascular supply to the brain from the internal carotid arteries and vertebrobasilar system. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 5.5. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Anterior communicating artery
Anteromedial arteries
Anterior perforated substance
Posterior perforated substance
Optic chiasm
Pituitary stalk
Posterolateral central arteries
(including thalamogeniculate artery)
Posteromedial central arteries
(including thalamoperforating artery)
Interpeduncular fossa
(floor of hypothalamus)
Basilar artery
PCA
Choroid plexus of temporal lobe
ACA
Medial striate artery
Anterolateral central arteries
(lateral striate)
MCA
ICA
Internal capsular branches of 
anterior choroidal artery
Posterior communicating artery
eFig. 9.22  Inferior/ventral view of the brain exposing the circle of Willis, which is completed by the anterior and posterior communicating 
arteries. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 5.1A. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1171 ===
e19
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Cerebral Vasculature
anterior portion of the parietal lobe. Along its course two 
large branches arise: the callosomarginal artery, which 
follows the cingulate sulcus, and the pericallosal artery, 
which is immediately adjacent to the corpus callosum (eFig. 
9.23). Given its course and branches, the ACA perfuses most 
of the medial aspect of the brain from the frontal lobe to 
the anterior portion of the parietal lobe.
Branching laterally from the internal carotid artery, the 
middle cerebral artery (MCA) penetrates the lateral fissure 
and gives off the lenticulostriate striate arteries (eFig. 9.24) 
before bifurcating into superior and inferior divisions, which 
loop extensively along the insula and frontal operculum 
before emerging on the lateral convexity of the cerebrum. 
The superior division perfuses the cortex above the lateral 
fissure, including the lateral frontal lobe and a small portion 
of the anterior parietal lobe (eFig. 9.21). The inferior divi­
sion perfuses the cortex below the lateral fissure, including 
the temporal lobe and the anterolateral portion of the 
parietal lobe.
The posterior cerebral cortex receives vascular supply 
from the vertebral-basilar system of arteries. This system 
begins with the vertebral arteries bilaterally, which arise 
from the subclavian arteries and ascend through the foramen 
transversarium of the cervical vertebrae in the neck. After 
entering the foramen magnum at the level of the ponto­
medullary junction, the arteries join to form the basilar 
artery, which courses along the midline of the ventral 
brainstem (eFig. 9.20). At the level of the midbrain, the 
basilar artery gives rise to the posterior cerebral artery (PCA), 
which turns posteriorly and gives rise to branches that perfuse 
Callosal branches
Callosomarginal artery
Polar frontal artery
Orbitofrontal artery
PCA
Lateral branch
Medial branch
Temporal branches
Occipitotemporal artery
Parietooccipital artery
Callosal branch
Pericallosal artery
Calcarine artery
ACA
eFig. 9.23  Branches and territories of the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries on the medial right hemisphere. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s 
Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 5.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Lateral striate arteries
Lateral striate arteries
Anterior cerebral artery
Middle cerebral
artery
Middle cerebral
artery
Posterior cerebral
artery
Anterior choroidal artery
Anterior choroidal
artery
Thalamic branches of 
posterior cerebral artery
eFig. 9.24  Distribution pattern of the perforating branches from 
the anterior, middle, and posterior cerebral arteries. (From Mtui E. 
Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 5.4. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1172 ===
Neuroanatomy
e20
the inferior and medial temporal and occipital lobes. Also 
at the PCA, a connecting artery, the posterior communicating 
artery, branches off and connects to the internal carotid 
artery (eFig. 9.22).
VENOUS DRAINAGE
Venous drainage of the cerebral hemispheres follows a system 
of deep veins, superficial veins, and dural venous sinuses 
before reaching the internal jugular vein. Before reaching 
the internal jugular veins, the superficial and deep veins 
connect to the dural sinuses located between the periosteal 
and meningeal layers of the dura. None of the vessels in 
this network have valves present in their lumen.
Running along the superior edge of the falx cerebri is 
the superior sagittal sinus. The superior sagittal sinus 
continues posteriorly to drain into the transverse sinuses 
bilaterally (eFig. 9.25A). Each transverse sinus turns 
inferiorly to form the sigmoid sinus, which exits the jugular 
foramen to become the internal jugular vein. Along the 
inferior margin of the falx cerebri is the inferior sagittal 
sinus (eFig. 9.25B). Posteriorly, the inferior sagittal sinus 
joins the great vein of Galen to form the straight sinus. The 
point where the straight sinus, superior sagittal sinus, and 
occipital sinus join is known as the confluence of the sinuses 
(eFig. 9.25B). The confluence of sinuses is drained by the 
transverse sinuses. Located on either side of the hypophysial 
fossa is a plexus of veins referred to as the cavernous sinus 
(eFig. 9.26). In addition to receiving drainage from the other 
sinuses, the cavernous sinus also receives the ophthalmic 
veins. The cavernous sinus is drained by the superior petrosal 
sinus into the transverse sinus and inferior petrosal sinuses 
into the internal jugular vein.
Venous drainage from the superficial veins is primarily 
received by the superior sagittal sinus and cavernous sinus. 
Although the pattern of superficial veins coursing through 
the subarachnoid space from the cerebral cortex is quite 
variable, three veins appear to be fairly constant. Positioned 
in parallel to the lateral fissure is the superficial middle 
cerebral vein, which drains into the cavernous sinus from 
the temporal lobe (eFig. 9.25A). Connecting to the superficial 
middle cerebral vein perpendicularly is the superior anas­
tomotic vein (of Trolard) (eFig. 9.25A). This vein courses 
superiorly across the parietal lobe to drain into the superior 
sagittal sinus. Also connecting to the superficial middle 
cerebral vein perpendicularly is the inferior anastomotic 
vein (of Labbé) (eFig. 9.25A). The inferior anastomotic vein 
passes inferiorly along the temporal lobe to drain into the 
transverse sinus.
Superior
anastomotic vein
Superior sagittal sinus
Confluence of the
sinuses
Transverse sinus
Sigmoid sinus
Internal jugular vein
Inferior anastomotic vein
Superficial middle
cerebral vein
Superior sagittal sinus
Inferior sagittal sinus
Great cerebral
vein
Straight sinus
Confluence of
the sinuses
A
B
eFig. 9.25  Venous branches of the brain. A. Lateral view. B. Sagittal view. (Modified from Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 7.9A. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Pituitary gland
Sphenoidal
air sinus
Oculomotor nerve
Trochlear nerve
Cavernous sinus
Internal carotid
artery
Dura mater
Maxillary nerve
Ophthalmic nerve
Abducent nerve
eFig. 9.26  Coronal section of the cavernous sinus. (From Crossman 
A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 7.11. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1173 ===
e21
9 
Part II: Brain  •  Venous Drainage
In contrast to the superficial veins, deep veins are more 
constant in their organization. Most of the deep veins even­
tually drain into the great cerebral vein (of Galen) before 
entering the dural venous sinuses (eFig. 9.27). Traveling 
adjacent to the ACA and MCA are the anterior cerebral vein 
and deep middle cerebral vein. These deep veins join to form 
the basal vein (of Rosenthal), which continues around the 
lateral aspect of the midbrain. Formed at the interventricular 
foramen by the joining of the septal and thalamostriate 
veins bilaterally are the internal cerebral veins (eFig. 9.27). 
Posterior to the midbrain, the internal cerebral veins and 
basal veins join to form the great cerebral vein (of Galen) 
(eFig. 9.27). From here the great cerebral vein joins the 
inferior sagittal sinus to form the straight sinus.
Caudate nucleus
Thalamostriate vein
Thalamus
Internal cerebral vein
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Choroidal vein
Choroid plexus
Third ventricle
Great cerebral vein
eFig. 9.27  Superior view of the brain with the corpus callosum removed to reveal the deep cerebral veins. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 
5th ed., Fig. 7.8. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1174 ===
Neuroanatomy
e22
Cerebral aqueduct
Habenula
Fornix
Interventricular
foramen
Anterior
commissure
Optic chiasm
Pineal gland
Hypothalamic sulcus
Mammillary body
Optic nerve
Hypothalamus
Thalamus
Stria medullaris thalami
Fornix
Massa intermedia
eFig. 9.28  Sagittal view of the right hemisphere showing the diencephalon and its relationship to surrounding structures. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 12.12. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Part III: Thalamus
The thalamus (Greek for “inner chamber”) is a large, egg-
shaped mass of gray matter derived from the diencephalon 
of the developing brain (see eTable 9.1). The most significant 
role of the thalamus is as a synaptic relay for pathways 
projecting to the cerebral cortex. However, the thalamus 
also acts as a gatekeeper to prevent or enhance informa­
tion transfer, depending on the behavioral state. Sensory, 
motor, limbic, and modulatory signals from behavioral and 
arousal circuits all have synaptic relays within the thalamic 
nuclei.
Because of its location deep within the brain, the thalamus 
is neighbored by several structures and also portions of the 
ventricular system. Anteriorly, the thalamus extends forward 
to contact the interventricular foramen, which connects 
the lateral and third ventricles (eFig. 9.28). Together, the 
thalamic nuclear masses and the ventrally located hypo­
thalamus comprise the lateral walls of the third ventricle. 
Immediately lateral to the thalamus is the posterior limb of 
the internal capsule (eFig. 9.29). Related to the dorsal aspect 
of the thalamus is the body of the lateral ventricle, and 
extending caudally is the midbrain portion of the brainstem 
(eFig. 9.28). Across the midline of the third ventricle, the 
two thalamic masses are interconnected by the interthalamic 
adhesion.
Based on their relationship to the internal medullary 
lamina, a Y-shaped band of myelinated axons coursing 
rostrocaudally through the thalamus, the thalamic nuclei 
are classified into four groups: (1) anterior, (2) medial, (3) 
lateral, and (4) intralaminar (eFig. 9.30). In addition to this 
structural categorization, the nuclei are divided into three 
major functional classes: (1) relay, (2) intralaminar, and (3) 
reticular. As mentioned earlier, most of the thalamus is 
composed of relay nuclei, which have reciprocal excitatory 
connections with the cortex. Relay nuclei are further 
subdivided into specific and nonspecific based on their projec­
tions to specific areas of the primary sensory and motor 
cortex or more diffuse cortical projections. The majority of 
specific relay nuclei reside in the lateral thalamus—in fact, 
all sensory modalities, with the exception of olfaction, have 
relays in the lateral thalamus before reaching their primary 
cortical target. Details of specific and nonspecific nuclei and 
their cortical connections can be reviewed in eTable 9.4.
Intralaminar nuclei reside within the internal medullary 
lamina and have numerous reciprocal projections, primarily 
with the basal ganglia and reticular formation (eFig. 9.30).
There are two major functional regions of the intralaminar 
nuclei: rostral and caudal. The rostral intralaminar nuclei have 
reciprocal connections with the basal ganglia and also relay 
input from the ascending reticular activating system. Caudal 
intralaminar nuclei, which include the large centromedian 
nucleus, are predominantly involved in basal ganglia circuitry.

=== PAGE 1175 ===
e23
9 
Part III: Thalamus
A
B
Third ventricle
Fornix
Globus pallidus
Hypothalamus
Reticular nucleus
Ventral lateral nucleus
Optic tract
Stria terminalis
Internal capsule
Mediodorsal nucleus
Stria medullaris
Caudate nucleus
Internal medullary lamina
Anterior nuclear group
Ventral anterior nucleus
Zona incerta
Subthalamic nucleus
Pons
A
B
eFig. 9.29  A and B. Coronal sections of the brain at different locations through the diencephalon. Sections are stained with Luxol fast blue to 
highlight myelinated axons. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 12.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1176 ===
Neuroanatomy
e24
GABAergic neurons of the reticular nucleus, allows it to 
regulate thalamic activity quite effectively.
Vascular supply to the thalamus arises from penetrating 
branches from the ACA, anterior choroidal artery branching 
from the internal carotid, lenticulostriate arteries of the 
middle cerebral artery and thalamoperforator arteries from 
the posterior cerebral arteries.
The reticular nucleus of the thalamus is a thin, sheet-
like structure along the lateral aspect of the thalamus just 
medial to the posterior limb of the internal capsule (eFig. 
9.30). Unlike the rest of the thalamic nuclei, the reticular 
nucleus does not send projections to the cerebral cortex, but 
rather receives input from other thalamic nuclei and the 
cortex, which project back to the thalamus. Functionally, 
this organization of inputs and outputs, along with the 
Reticular nucleus
Anterior nuclear group
Lateral nuclear group
Medial nuclear group
Medial nuclear group
Internal medullary lamina
Internal medullary lamina
Intralaminar nuclear group
Lateral nuclear group
A
B
eFig. 9.30  Left thalamus viewed anterolaterally (A) in coronal section (B), outlining the primary nuclear groups. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 12.5A and B. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
eTable 9.4  Thalamic nuclei and their connections
Type
Nucleus
Afferents
Efferents
Specific (or relay)
Anterior
Mammillary bodies Hippocampus
Cingulate cortex
Ventral anterior (VA)
Substantia nigra (pars reticulata)
Prefrontal cortex
Ventral lateral (VL)
VL, anterior part
VL, posterior part
Globus pallidus (internal segment)
Cerebellar nuclei
Supplementary motor area
Premotor and motor cortex
Ventral posterior (VP)
Ventral posterolateral (VPL)
Somatic afferents from trunk and limbs
Somatic sensory cortex
Ventral posteromedial (VPM)
Somatic afferents from the head region
Somatic sensory cortex
Medial geniculate body
Brachium of the inferior colliculus
Primary auditory cortex
Lateral geniculate body
Optic tract
Primary visual cortex
Association
Lateral dorsal (LD)
Hippocampus
Cingulate cortex
Dorsomedial (DM)
Prefrontal cortex, olfactory and limbic
Prefrontal cortex
Lateral posterior (LP)/pulvinar
Superior colliculus, primary visual, 
auditory, and somatosensory cortex
Posterior parietal and lateral 
temporal association cortex
Nonspecific
Intralaminar (centromedian, 
parafascicular, others)
Reticular formation, basal ganglia, 
limbic system
Cerebral cortex, corpus striatum
Reticular
Thalamus and cortex
Thalamus
From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy and Neuroscience. 7th ed., Table 27.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2017.

=== PAGE 1177 ===
e25
9 
Part IV: Brainstem  •  External Midbrain
Pineal gland
CN IV
CN V
CN IX
CN X
CN XI
Vertebral artery
First cervical nerve
Second denticulate ligament
First denticulate ligament
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Dorsal root ganglion (C3)
Fourth cervical nerve
Dura mater
Ligamentum flavum
Arachnoid
Dorsal root filaments (C2)
Posterior spinal artery
First cervical vertebra (atlas)
Sigmoid sinus
Tentorium cerebelli
CNs VII and VIII
eFig. 9.31  Posterior orientation of the brainstem as it transitions into the spinal cord. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 11-1. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016; from Mettler FA. Neuroanatomy. 2nd ed. St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 1948.)
Part IV: Brainstem
OVERVIEW
The brainstem is a stalklike structure within the posterior 
cranial fossa of the skull connecting the forebrain and spinal 
cord (eFig. 9.31). From rostral to caudal, the brainstem 
consists of the midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata. 
Broadly speaking, the brainstem has three main functions: 
(1) it is a conduit for tracts ascending and descending through 
the CNS; (2) it houses cranial nerve nuclei III to XII (note 
that the CNXI is in the cervical spinal cord); and (3) it is 
the location for reflex centers related to respiration, cardio­
vascular function, and regulation of consciousness. 
Externally, each portion of the brainstem has a distinct 
appearance and structural features that define its many 
functional roles.
EXTERNAL MIDBRAIN
Approximately 2 cm in length, the midbrain connects the 
forebrain to the pons caudally and the cerebellum posteriorly 

=== PAGE 1178 ===
Neuroanatomy
e26
on the posterior surface are the superior and inferior colliculi 
(eFig. 9.32A). Between the inferior colliculi, cranial nerve 
IV, the trochlear nerve, emerges, crosses the midline, and 
wraps around the lateral aspect of the midbrain (eFig. 
9.32A). Laterally, the superior brachium and inferior bra­
chium can be seen as they project in an anterolateral 
direction from the superior and inferior colliculi.
(eFig. 9.32A). Along the midline of the anterior surface 
there is a deep depression, the interpeduncular fossa, which 
has several perforations on its surface where small vessels 
perforate through the floor of the fossa. On either side of 
the interpeduncular fossa are the crus cerebri (eFig. 9.32B). 
Projecting medially from the crus is cranial nerve III, the 
oculomotor nerve (eFig. 9.33A). The most prominent features 
B
Mammillary body
Crus cerebri
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Olive
Pyramid
Decussation of pyramids
Anterior median fissure
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Thalamus
Superior colliculus
Inferior colliculus
Trochlear nerve
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Floor of fourth ventricle
Lateral recess and aperture of fourth ventricle
Cuneate tubercle
Gracile tubercle
Fasciculus cuneatus
Fasciculus gracilis
A
eFig. 9.32  Posterior view of the brainstem. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1179 ===
e27
9 
Part IV: Brainstem  •  External Pons
V, the motor and sensory root of the trigeminal nerve, 
emerges (eFig. 9.33B). At the junction of the pons and 
medulla, from medial to lateral, cranial nerves VI (abdu­
cent), VII (facial), and VIII (vestibulocochlear) emerge 
(eFig. 9.33C). The posterior surface of the pons faces the 
cerebellum and forms the floor of the fourth ventricle 
(eFig. 9.32A). Along the midline of the posterior surface 
is a prominent bump, the facial colliculus, which rep­
resents the relationship between the facial nerve fibers 
as they wind around the nucleus of the abducent nerve 
(eFig. 9.33C).
EXTERNAL PONS
Caudal to the midbrain, the pons is approximately 2.5 cm 
in length and connects the midbrain to the medulla (eFig. 
9.32B). The midline of the anterior surface has a shallow 
groove, the basilar groove, where the basilar artery resides 
along its course (eFig. 9.32B). On either side of the basilar 
groove, the pons has a prominent convex shape as a result 
of the vast number of fibers bridging through the pons to 
the cerebellum through the middle cerebellar peduncle. 
Along the anterolateral surface of the pons, cranial nerve 
Olfactory bulb
Optic nerve
Mammillary body
Oculomotor nerve
Pons
A
B
C
D
Trigeminal nerve
Oculomotor nerve
Optic nerve
Pons
Medulla
Trochlear nerve
Trochlear nerve
Abducens nerve
Pons
Trigeminal nerve
Facial nerve
Vestibulocochlear 
nerve
Glossopharyngeal 
nerve
Pyramid
Cranial root of 
accessory nerve
Rootlets of 
glossopharyngeal 
and vagus nerves
Rootlets of
hypoglossal nerve
Pons
Vestibulocochlear 
nerve
Spinal root of 
accessory nerve
Pyramid
Olive
eFig. 9.33  Posterior or dorsal (A) aspect of the brainstem after the cerebellum and cerebrum were removed. Anterior or ventral (B) aspect of 
the brainstem after the cerebellum and cerebrum were removed. C. Ventral brainstem with cranial nerves emerging from the pons and medulla 
highlighted. D. Ventral brainstem emphasizing cranial nerves emerging from the lateral aspect of the pons and medulla. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Figs. 9.1, 9.3, 10.9, and 10.11. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1180 ===
Neuroanatomy
e28
BRAINSTEM INTERNAL FEATURES
Internal structures of the brainstem can be identified by 
their general location in the tectum (Latin for “roof”), 
tegmentum (Latin for “covering”), or basis (eFig. 9.34). To 
identify the structures present in each level of the brainstem, 
it is best to view serial sections stained for myelin. This way, 
nuclear groups and myelinated axons can be more easily 
distinguished from one another.
INTERNAL MIDBRAIN
The tectum is the most obvious landmark of the midbrain, 
as it consists of the prominent superior colliculi, inferior 
colliculi, and underlying cerebral aqueduct. Given the short 
length of the midbrain, stained serial sections typically 
include either the superior colliculi, which are located 
rostrally, or the inferior colliculi, which are caudal. In addition 
to the superior colliculi, within a rostral section of the 
midbrain prominent nuclei such as the oculomotor nuclei, 
Edinger–Westphal nuclei, red nuclei, mesencephalic nuclei 
of cranial nerve V, and substantia nigra can be seen (eFig. 
9.35). In caudal sections of the midbrain the inferior col­
liculus, trochlear nucleus, mesencephalic nuclei of cranial 
nerve V, and substantia nigra are present (eFig. 9.36).
INTERNAL PONS
Sections from the rostral pons are significant for pontine 
nuclei and multiple transversely oriented pontocerebellar 
EXTERNAL MEDULLA OBLONGATA
The medulla is the longest portion of the brainstem, measur­
ing approximately 3 cm in length (eFig. 9.32A). At the rostral 
connection of the medulla to the pons, it has a broad conical 
shape that tapers caudally before connecting with the spinal 
cord at the level of the foramen magnum. Along the midline 
of the anterior surface is the anterior median fissure, which 
continues on to the anterior surface of the spinal cord (eFig. 
9.33B). Lateral to the fissure are the medullary pyramids 
composed of motor fibers descending from the cerebral cortex 
(eFig. 9.33B). Continuing caudally, the pyramids eventually 
give way to the decussation of the pyramids where the 
majority of motor fibers decussate to the opposing side. 
Lateral to the pyramids are the olives, which represent the 
underlying inferior olivary nuclei. It is at the junction of 
the pyramid and the olive that the rootlets of cranial nerve 
XII, the hypoglossal nerve, emerge (eFig. 9.33D). Oriented 
posterior to the olives are the inferior cerebellar peduncles, 
which form a connection between the cerebellum and 
medulla (eFig. 9.33D). At the junction of the olive and 
inferior cerebellar peduncles from rostral to caudal, rootlets 
of cranial nerves IX (glossopharyngeal), X (vagus), and XI 
(spinal accessory) emerge. Like the pons, the posterior surface 
of the medulla forms the floor of the fourth ventricle (eFig. 
9.32A). Coursing down the midline of the posterior medulla 
is the posterior median sulcus, which continues into the 
spinal cord. On either side of the sulcus are the gracile and 
cuneate tubercles, formed by the underlying gracile nucleus 
and cuneate nuclei (eFig. 9.32A).
Pyramid
A
B
C
Inferior olivary nucleus
Basal pons
Cerebral peduncle
Tectum
Tegmentum
Tegmentum
eFig. 9.34  Brainstem cross-sections: rostral medulla (A), rostral pons (B), and rostral midbrain (C). Whereas the tegmentum is present at all 
levels of the brainstem, the tectum can only be seen in the midbrain. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 11-5. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016.)

=== PAGE 1181 ===
e29
9 
Part IV: Brainstem  •  Internal Pons
Superior colliculus
Periaqueductal grey
Cerebral aqueduct
Oculomotor nucleus
Brachium of inferior colliculus
Spinal lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Ventral tegmental area
Red nucleus
Substantia nigra
Fibres of
oculomotor nerve
Temporopontine fibres
Corticobulbar and
corticospinal fibres
Frontopontine fibres
Trigeminal lemniscus
Crus cerebri
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Edinger–Westphal nucleus
eFig. 9.35  Rostral midbrain. Transverse section of the rostral midbrain at the location of the superior colliculus. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.13. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Inferior colliculus
Cerebral aqueduct
Periaqueductal grey
Lateral lemniscus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Spinal lemniscus
Medial lemniscus
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncle
Corticobulbar and
corticospinal fibres
Pontocerebellar fibres
eFig. 9.36  Pontine–mesencephalic junction. Transverse section at the location of the pontine–mesencephalic junction. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.11. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
fibers en route to the contralateral cerebellum. Interspersed 
among these horizontally running axon are longitudinally 
running corticospinal fibers (eFig. 9.37). Dorsal to this col­
lection of fiber bundles, the medial lemniscus is oriented 
horizontally, forming a borderlike structure between the basal 
and tegmental portion of the pons (eFig. 9.37). At the lateral 
edge of the medial lemniscus, the spinothalamic tract can be 
seen, because it neighbors the superior cerebellar peduncle 
(eFig. 9.37). Near the midline, the medial longitudinal 
fasciculus resides just ventral to the periaqueductal gray 
matter.
At mid-pontine levels the superior cerbellar peduncles form 
the lateral walls of the expanding fourth ventricle (eFig. 9.38). 
Also at this level, the prominent middle cerebellar peduncles 
can also be seen, along with the motor nucleus and principal 
sensory nucleus of cranial nerve V, the trigeminal nerve.
In the caudal aspect of the pons, the abducent nucleus 
can be appreciated just lateral to the medial longitudinal 

=== PAGE 1182 ===
Neuroanatomy
e30
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Fourth ventricle
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Trigeminal nerve
Medial lemniscus
Pontocerebellar fibres
Trapezoid body
Pontine nuclei
Corticospinal fibres
Reticular formation
eFig. 9.38  Mid-pons. Transverse section of the mid-pons at the location of the trigeminal nerve. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., 
Fig. 9.9. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Lateral lemniscus
Central canal
Central grey
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Spinothalamic tract
Medial lemniscus
Corticobulbar and
corticospinal fibres
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Locus coeruleus
Pontine nuclei
eFig. 9.37  Rostral pons. Transverse section of the rostral pons. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.10. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015.)
fasciculus (eFig. 9.39). Also present at this level is the medial 
vestibular nucleus in addition to the anterior and posterior 
cochlear nuclei.
INTERNAL MEDULLA OBLONGATA
From rostral to caudal the internal structures of the medulla 
will be briefly described from three levels: (1) level of the 
inferior olivary nucleus, (2) decussation of the internal 
arcuate fibers, and (3) decussation of the pyramids. Nuclei 
visible in a transverse section at the level of the inferior 
olivary nucleus include those associated with cranial nerves 
VIII (vestibulocochlear), IX (glossopharyngeal), X (vagus), 
XI (spinal accessory), and XII (hypoglossal) (eFig. 9.40). At 
this level, the medial lemniscus maintains a vertical position 
immediately adjacent to the midline. Dorsal to the medial 
lemniscus are the medial longitudinal fasciculus and 
hypoglossal nucleus. A large distinguishing structure at this 
rostral level is the laterally oriented inferior cerebellar 
peduncle, which connects to the cerebellum posteriorly.
Continuing caudally at the level of the internal arcuate 
fibers, the dorsal aspect of the medulla is populated by the 
gracile nucleus medially, followed by the cuneate and spinal 
trigeminal nucleus laterally. Ventral to the cuneate and 
gracile nuclei, their neuronal axons can be seen decussat­
ing as internal arcuate fibers to form the medial lemniscus 
near the midline of the medulla. Lateral to the internal 
arcuate fibers and ventral to the spinal trigeminal tract, the 

=== PAGE 1183 ===
e31
9 
Part IV: Brainstem  •  Vascular Supply to the Brainstem
the vertebrobasilar system of arteries. As mentioned in the 
“Cerebral Vasculature” section, the vertebrobasilar system 
begins with the vertebral arteries bilaterally, which arise 
from the subclavian arteries and ascend through the foramen 
transversaria of cervical vertebrae C6 to C2 in the neck. At 
the pontomedullary junction, the vertebral arteries fuse to 
form the single basilar artery. The basilar artery continues 
rostrally and terminates as the paired posterior cerebral 
arteries at the pontomesencephalic junction.
Before merging and forming the basilar artery, each 
vertebral artery gives rise to a posterior inferior cerebellar 
artery (PICA) and posterior spinal artery and contributes 
to the formation of the anterior spinal artery (eFig. 9.42). 
The PICA perfuses the lateral aspect of the medulla and the 
spinocerebellar and anterolateral tracts can be seen along 
the perimeter of the medulla (eFig. 9.41).
Before transitioning into the spinal cord, the pyramidal 
decussation can be observed along the midline of the caudal 
medulla (eFig. 9.36). Dorsal to these decussating fibers, the 
gracile and cuneate nuclei begin to emerge as their fasciculi 
continue rostrally. Note that the spinal accessory nucleus 
(CN XI) is located in the cervical spinal cord and not the 
medulla.
VASCULAR SUPPLY TO THE BRAINSTEM
Vascular supply to the brainstem, and other structures in 
the posterior cranial fossa, is provided by branches off of 
Cerebellum
Dentate nucleus
Choroid plexus
Fourth ventricle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Abducens nucleus
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Medial lemniscus
Pontocerebellar fibres
Pontine nuclei
Corticospinal fibres
eFig. 9.39  Caudal pons. Transverse section of the caudal pons. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.8. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015.)
Fourth ventricle
Hypoglossal nucleus
Dorsal motor nucleus
of vagus
Solitary tract
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior vestibular nucleus
Lateral vestibular nucleus
   Inferior cerebellar
 peduncle
Hypoglossal nerve fibres
Inferior olivary nucleus
Pyramid
Medial lemniscus
Nucleus raphé magnus
Reticular formation
Nucleus solitarius
(nucleus of solitary tract)
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
eFig. 9.40  Rostral medulla. Transverse section of the rostral medulla at the location of the inferior olivary nucleus. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.7. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1184 ===
Neuroanatomy
e32
Fasciculus gracilis
Nucleus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
Nucleus cuneatus
Spinal tract of trigeminal
Nucleus of spinal tract of trigeminal
Spinocerebellar tracts
Pyramid
Central grey
Internal arcuate fibres
Decussation of internal arcuate fibres
Medial lemniscus
eFig. 9.41  Mid-medulla. Transverse section of the mid-medulla at the location of the internal arcuate fiber decussation. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 9.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Anterior cerebral artery
Anterior communicating artery
Optic nerve
Internal carotid artery
Middle cerebral artery
Posterior communicating artery
Oculomotor nerve
Trochlear nerve
Infundibulum
Posterior cerebral artery
Superior cerebellar artery
Optic tract
Basilar artery
Trigeminal nerve
Anterior inferior cerebellar artery
Vertebral artery
Posterior inferior cerebellar artery
Anterior spinal artery
Pons
Cerebral peduncle
Medulla
Mammillary body
Optic chiasm
eFig. 9.42  Circle of Willis. Arterial branches on the inferior surface of the brain, which form the circle of Willis. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 7.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1185 ===
e33
9 
Part IV: Brainstem  •  Vascular Supply to the Brainstem
Just before the midbrain, the superior cerebellar arteries 
branch off of the basilar artery and supply the superior 
cerebellar peduncles and caudal aspect of the dorsal midbrain 
before reaching the superior portion of the cerebellar 
hemispheres. Paramedian branches from the basilar artery 
supply the medial aspect of the midbrain (eFig. 9.43C). The 
final branches emerging from the top of the basilar artery 
are the PCAs, which perfuse the lateral aspect of the midbrain 
before reaching the thalamus, medial occipital, and inferior 
temporal lobes (eFig. 9.43C and D).
inferior portion of the cerebellum. The medial and anterior 
portions of the medulla receive vascular supply from the 
paramedian branches off of the vertebral and anterior spinal 
arteries.
At the level of the caudal pons, the anterior inferior 
cerebellar artery (AICA) branches off of the basilar artery 
and perfuses the lateral portion of the caudal pons (eFig. 
9.43A). Rostral levels of the lateral pons are perfused by 
circumferential branches of the basilar artery (eFig. 9.43A 
and B). Medial portions of the pons are perfused by para­
median branches off of the basilar artery as it continues 
rostrally toward the midbrain.
Area supplied by:
Vertebral a. 
Anterior spinal a.
 
Posterior spinal a.
 
Posterior inferior cerebellar a.
Basilar a. 
Anterior inferior cerebellar a.
 
Superior cerebellar a.
Posterior cerebral a. 
Posterior communicating a.
A
B
C
D
eFig. 9.43  Distribution pattern of arterial supply to the brainstem. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 11-30C–F. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1186 ===
Neuroanatomy
e34
column to the LI and LII vertebral level in an adult (eFig. 
9.44). Numerous ascending and descending axonal tracts 
course through the spinal cord and connect with the brain 
to convey sensory (afferent) and motor (efferent) information 
for facilitation of movement, reflexes, sensory input, and 
feedback mechanisms.
Part V: Spinal cord
OVERVIEW
The spinal cord is continuous with the medulla oblongata 
near the foramen magnum at the base of the skull. Cylindri­
cal in shape, it occupies the vertebral canal of the vertebral 
Cervical
nerves
Thoracic
nerves
Lumbar
nerves
Sacral
nerves
Coccygeal
nerve
C1
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Cervical
enlargement
Lumbar
enlargement
eFig. 9.44  Relationship of the vertebral column to spinal cord segments and spinal nerves. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.3. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1187 ===
e35
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Spinal Meninges
SPINAL MENINGES
Like the brain, the spinal cord is surrounded by three con­
centric meninges: the dura mater, arachnoid mater, and 
pia mater. The spinal dura mater is continuous with the 
inner meningeal layer of the cranial dura mater and extends 
Denticulate ligament
Dorsal roots of spinal 
nerves
Lumbar enlargement
Epidural space
Filum terminale
Dura mater
Termination of the 
subarachnoid 
space at S2
Conus medullaris
Termination of the 
spinal cord at L1
Cauda equina
Subarachnoid space
eFig. 9.45  Dorsal aspect of the spinal cord caudal to T9–T10. The dura/
arachnoid mater has been cut longitudinally and reflected to reveal the 
spinal cord and nerve roots, including the cauda equina, within the 
subarachnoid space. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.4. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
inferiorly to the posterior surface of the vertebral body of S2 
(eFig. 9.45). It is separated from the bony vertebral canal 
by the epidural/extradural space (eFig. 9.45). In addition, 
unlike in the cranial cavity, the underlying arachnoid mater 
is not tightly adherent to the dura mater, and instead has a 
theoretical plane or potential space called the subdural space.

=== PAGE 1188 ===
Neuroanatomy
e36
The innermost pia mater is a highly vascular layer 
that is adherent to the surface of the spinal cord. Midway 
between the anterior and posterior roots the pia mater 
forms a flat continuous sheet, the denticulate ligament 
(eFig. 9.46B). At the posterior and anterior rootlets, 
sleevelike projections from the denticulate ligament 
extend out through the arachnoid mater to attach onto 
the dura mater. These delicate attachments anchor and 
position the spinal cord within the central area of the 
subarachnoid space.
Although the arachnoid mater of the spinal cord has a 
less adherent relationship with the dura mater than in the 
cranial cavity, the overall structure of the arachnoid mater 
is the same (eFig. 9.46A). The subarachnoid space created 
by the loose relationship of the arachnoid and underlying 
pia mater extends inferiorly to the level of the SII vertebra 
(eFig. 9.45). Given that the spinal cord terminates near the 
LI–LII vertebrae, this lower termination point of the sub­
arachnoid space creates a safe and enlarged space for 
accessing CSF in the clinical setting (eFig. 9.45).
T4
T4 SG
T4 dorsal root
T4 ventral root
Dura mater
T5
T6 PRs
T6 ARs
T6
Pia mater
and spinal blood vessels
Arachnoid
trabeculae
Arachnoid
Dura mater
Arachnoid
Ventral roots:
C2
C3
C4
C5
C6
Denticulate
ligament
Denticulate
ligament
Dura mater
Intracranial
dura
Spinal dura
Arachnoid
Subarachnoid space
Epidural space
Pia mater
Denticulate
ligament
C
B
A
D
eFig. 9.46  Spinal meninges of the spinal cord within the vertebral canal. Denticulate ligaments extend from the pia mater and penetrate 
through the arachnoid mater to anchor the spinal cord to the dural sheath. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain, 7th ed., Fig. 4-13A and B. From A 
and B modified from Nolte J. Elsevier’s Integrated Neuroscience. Philadelphia: Mosby/Elsevier; 2007.)

=== PAGE 1189 ===
e37
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Internal Features
extends from L2 to S3 and innervates the lower extremities 
(eFig. 9.44).
INTERNAL FEATURES
A cross-section of the spinal cord reveals an inner H-shaped 
gray matter consisting of neuronal cell bodies and an outer 
white matter composed of myelinated neuronal axons. The 
ventral or anterior horns of gray matter contain cell bodies 
of motor neurons, whereas the dorsal or posterior horns 
contain cell bodies receiving sensory information (eFig. 9.47). 
An enlargement of the lateral portion of the gray matter, 
termed the intermediolateral cell column, can be seen in the 
T1 to L2 region of the spinal cord (eFig. 9.49). This region 
enlarges to accommodate the preganglionic cell bodies of 
the sympathetic nervous system. To further define the diverse 
cytoarchitecture of the gray matter, it is divided into 10 
EXTERNAL FEATURES
The anterior and posterior surfaces of the spinal cord have 
several longitudinally running fissures and sulci. Along the 
midline on the anterior surface of the spinal cord is a deep 
separation, the anterior median fissure (eFig. 9.47). Poste­
riorly the spinal cord has a shallower separation, the posterior 
median sulcus, which is flanked on either side by a postero­
lateral sulcus (eFig. 9.47). Emerging from the spinal cord 
are a series of rootlets, which coalesce to form anterior and 
posterior roots at the corresponding cord segment (eFig. 
9.48). These anterior and posterior roots converge to form 
31 pairs of spinal nerves, which extend the length of the 
spinal cord (eFig. 9.44). Along the length of the spinal cord 
two regions are enlarged to accommodate the numerous 
neurons innervating the upper and lower extremities. The 
cervical enlargement extends from C5 to T1 and innervates 
the upper extremities, whereas the lumbar enlargement 
LF
AF
PH
IG
AH
Posterior
intermediate
sulcus
Posterolateral
sulcus
Lissauer’s
tract
Anterior white
fissure
PF
commissure
Anterior median 
* *
eFig. 9.47  Spinal cord cross-section at the eighth cervical segment. AF, anterior funiculus; AH, anterior horn; IG, intermediate gray matter; LF, 
lateral funiculus; PF, posterior funiculus; PH, posterior horn; asterisks indicate the substantia gelatinosa. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th 
ed., Fig. 10-7A. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1190 ===
Neuroanatomy
e38
1
12
11
10
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
9
5
6
7
8
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Co
C7
C6
C5
C4
Cervical enlargement
(of spinal cord)
C2
C3
C1
Lumbosacral enlargement
(of spinal cord)
Cauda equina
Pedicles of vertebrae
Spinal ganglion
eFig. 9.48  Posterior view of the spinal cord within the vertebral canal. Posterior roots can be seen merging into the spinal nerve. The posterior 
root and anterior root (not seen) both contribute to the spinal nerve. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.4. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015.)

=== PAGE 1191 ===
e39
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Internal Features
C3
C5
C8
T5
T10
L2
L5
S4
SG
SG
Actual
size
Actual
size
SG
SG
DR
DR
DR
DR
L
L
L
L
C
L
L
L
C
C
L
IL 
IL 
FG
FC
FC
FC
FG
FG
FG
FG
FG
FG
FG
eFig. 9.49  Spinal cord cross sections taken from the cervical, thoracic, lumbar, and sacral levels. Note the change in shape of the anterior and 
posterior horns at the various levels. DR, dorsal root; FG, fasciculus gracilis; FC, fasciculus cuneatus; L, Lissauer’s tract; SG, substantia gelatinosa; 
C, Clarke’s nucleus; IL, intermediolateral cell column. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 6th ed., Fig. 10.8, Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2009.)

=== PAGE 1192 ===
Neuroanatomy
e40
axons conveying sensory information (eFig. 9.47). The lateral 
funiculus has a mixture of axons conveying both sensory 
and motor information.
ASCENDING TRACTS IN THE SPINAL CORD
Sensory information entering the CNS from peripheral 
sensory receptors is conducted through a series of neurons 
that synapse with targets in the spinal cord, cerebral cortex, 
and other brain structures. The sensory modalities carried 
in these pathways include pain, temperature, tactile, and 
proprioceptive input. Conscious perception of sensory input 
is transmitted through neuronal pathways, which reach 
the primary somatosensory region of the cerebral cortex. 
In addition to conscious sensory input, there is subconscious 
sensory input, which is transmitted to other structures such 
as the cerebellum. For simplicity, in this section we will review 
the sensory pathways that reach conscious perception and 
discuss the pathways conveying subconscious sensory input 
in the section on cerebellum.
Two somatosensory pathways ascend within the spinal 
cord to reach the cortex: (1) the anterolateral pathways, 
which convey sensations of pain, temperature, and crude 
touch; and (2) the posterior column–medial lemniscal 
pathway, which conveys sensations of discriminative or 
fine touch, vibration, and conscious proprioception (eFig. 
9.51). Both of these pathways transmit information through 
zones known as Rexed’s laminae (eFig. 9.50). These will be 
referred to as they relate to later discussions of the ascending 
and descending tracts within the spinal cord.
The anterior funiculus of the white matter consists of 
motor axons, whereas the posterior funiculus consists of 
Clark’s column
Medial
Nucleus
proprius
Interomedial
lateral 
nucleus
Motor nuclei
lateral
Substantia
gelatinosa
Lissauer’s tract
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
eFig. 9.50  Rexed’s laminae. Cytoarchitecture of the spinal cord 
gray matter. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th 
ed., Fig. 15.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Ascending tracts
Descending tracts
Fasciculus gracilis
Fasciculus cuneatus
Dorsal spinocerebellar tract
Ventral spinocerebellar tract
Spinothalamic tract
Fasciculus proprius
Lissauer's tract
Lateral corticospinal tract
Rubrospinal tract
Medullary reticulospinal tract
Lateral vestibulospinal tract
Pontine reticulospinal tract
Tectospinal tract
Ventral corticospinal tract
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Lissauer's tract
eFig. 9.51  Tracts in the spinal cord. Both ascending and descending tracts in the spinal cord are present bilaterally. For ease of viewing, the 
ascending tracts are displayed on the left and descending tracts are shown on the right side. Note that Lissauer’s tract and the fasciculus 
proprius have both ascending and descending fibers. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.15. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1193 ===
e41
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Ascending Tracts in the Spinal Cord
forming the spinothalamic tract is located in a spinal ganglion 
(eFig. 9.52). Axons then enter the spinal cord through the 
posterior root to reach the posterior horn. From here, axons 
have two courses: some synapse immediately on second-order 
neurons in the posterior horn gray matter (lamina I and 
V), and others have axonal collaterals that ascend or descend 
one to two spinal cord segments in the posterolateral tract 
of Lissauer before synapsing with the second-order neurons 
in the gray matter (eFig. 9.51). Axons of the second-order 
a series of three neurons. We will review the anterolateral 
pathway first.
Anterolateral pathways
The anterolateral pathways are composed of three tracts: 
the spinothalamic, spinoreticular, and spinomesencephalic 
tract. Separate aspects of pain are conveyed through the 
spinothalamic tract, so we will follow the course of those 
neurons first. The first-order neuronal cell body of axons 
Cerebral hemisphere
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cervical cord
Lumbar cord
Third-order neurones
Second-order neurones
First-order neurones
Internal capsule
Thalamus
Red nucleus
Crus cerebri
Spinal lemniscus
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Pyramid
Ventral white
commissure
Spinothalamic tract
Fascicles of
corticospinal fibres
Sensory cortex
Upper limb
Sensory cortex
Lower limb
eFig. 9.52  Anterolateral/spinothalamic tract. The somatosensory pathways conveying modalities of pain, temperature, and crude touch. (From 
Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.17. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1194 ===
Neuroanatomy
e42
of these systems are composed of an upper motor neuron 
with cell bodies located in the cerebral cortex or brainstem 
and a lower motor neuron with cell bodies located in the 
spinal cord gray matter. We will begin by exploring the tracts 
of the lateral motor system first.
Lateral motor systems
Tracts of the lateral motor system include the lateral cor­
ticospinal tract and rubrospinal tract. Both are located in 
the lateral column of the spinal cord white matter and 
synapse on lower motor neuronal cell bodies in the lateral 
aspect of the anterior horn gray matter.
Clinically, the most important tract is the lateral corti­
cospinal tract, because it is responsible for controlling 
movement of the upper and lower extremities. Cell bodies 
of upper motor neurons forming this tract are located in 
the primary motor cortex (eFig. 9.54). Axons of these upper 
motor neurons converge in the corona radiata and descend 
through the posterior limb of the internal capsule to reach 
the crus cerebri of the midbrain. These axons continue 
through the anterior aspect of the pons as small bundles 
to accommodate the transverse pontocerebellar fibers, which 
are also present in this location. Once the fibers reach the 
medulla, they are again grouped together and form a large 
swelling known as the pyramid (eFig. 9.54). At the caudal 
medulla, before transitioning into the spinal cord, most of 
the axons decussate over to the contralateral side to form 
the lateral corticospinal tract (eFig. 9.54). The remaining 
axons will stay ipsilateral and form the anterior corticospinal 
tract, a tract included in the medial motor systems.
After decussating and forming the lateral corticospinal 
tract, the axons descend through the spinal cord to synapse 
on the cell bodies of lower motor neurons in the lateral 
portion of the anterior horn gray matter. Axons of these 
lower motor neurons then exit the spinal cord through the 
anterior root (eFig. 9.54).
The other lateral motor system pathway is the rubrospinal 
tract (eFig. 9.55). Cell bodies of upper motor neurons in 
this pathway begin in the red nucleus of the midbrain. After 
leaving the red nucleus, the axons cross the midline as the 
ventral tegmental decussation and descend as the rubrospinal 
tract through the brainstem and lateral column of the spinal 
cord white matter (eFig. 9.55). These axons only descend 
to cervical regions of the spinal cord, and axons synapse 
with interneurons in the anterior horn gray matter to 
facilitate flexor muscle activity and inhibit extensor muscle 
activity of the upper limb.
Medial motor systems
Tracts of the medial motor system regulate axial or truncal 
muscles involved in maintaining posture, balance, automatic 
gait-related movements, and orientating movements of the 
neurons then cross obliquely over two to three spinal cord 
segments within the anterior commissure of the spinal cord 
to join the anterolateral tract on the contralateral side (eFig. 
9.52). These second-order axons ascend through the CNS 
to reach the third-order neuronal cell bodies in the ventral 
posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus (eFig. 9.52). Axons 
from the third-order neurons then project through the 
posterior limb of the internal capsule to reach the primary 
somatosensory cortex (eFig. 9.52).
The spinoreticular and spinomesencephalic tracts have 
a similar beginning as the spinothalamic tract. The principal 
difference is the target structure of the second-order axons. 
Rather than project to the thalamus as the spinothalamic 
tract does, the spinoreticular tract projects to the reticular 
formation in the brainstem to convey the emotional and 
arousal aspects of pain (eFig. 9.52), and the spinomesen­
cephalic tract projects to the periaqueductal gray matter 
and superior colliculi in the midbrain for the central modula­
tion of pain (eFig. 9.52).
Posterior column–medial lemniscal pathway
First-order neuronal cells bodies of the posterior column–
medial lemniscal pathway are located in a spinal ganglion 
(eFig. 9.53). Axons then enter the spinal cord through the 
posterior root to reach either the gracile fasciculus (gracile 
means “thin”), which carries information from the lower 
limb and trunk, or the cuneate fasciculus (cuneate means 
“wedge-shaped”), which carries information from the upper 
limb and neck. These first-order axons then ascend ipsilater­
ally to the caudal medulla and synapse with the second-order 
neuronal cell bodies within the nucleus gracilis and nucleus 
cuneatus (eFig. 9.53). Axons of these second-order neurons 
then cross over as the internal arcuate fibers to form the 
medial lemniscus in the contralateral medulla (eFig. 9.53). 
These second-order axons ascend through the brainstem 
to reach the third-order neuronal cell bodies in the ventral 
posterior lateral nucleus of the thalamus (eFig. 9.53). Axons 
from the third-order neurons then project through the 
posterior limb of the internal capsule to reach the primary 
somatosensory cortex (eFig. 9.53).
DESCENDING TRACTS IN THE SPINAL CORD
Descending tracts through the spinal cord are involved in 
voluntary movements; postural movements; and coordination 
of head, neck, and eye movements. These pathways originate 
from the cerebral cortex and brainstem and are influenced 
by sensory input and feedback circuitry from the cerebellum 
and basal ganglia. Structures that influence regulation of 
motor planning and voluntary control will be discussed in 
subsequent sections. In this section we will review the tracts 
of the medial and lateral motor systems. The tracts in each 

=== PAGE 1195 ===
e43
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Descending Tracts in the Spinal Cord
Fasciculus gracilis
Cerebral hemisphere
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cervical cord
Lumbar cord
Medial lemniscus
Pyramid
Fasciculus cuneatus
Internal arcuate fibres
Nucleus cuneatus
Nucleus gracilis
Medial lemniscus
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Crus cerebri
Red nucleus
Medial lemniscus
Thalamus
Internal capsule
Sensory cortex
Upper limb
Sensory cortex
Lower limb
Third-order neurones
Second-order neurones
First-order neurones
eFig. 9.53  Posterior column–medial lemniscal pathway/dorsal columns. The somatosensory pathways conveying modalities of conscious 
proprioception, vibration, and discriminative touch. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.16. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1196 ===
Neuroanatomy
e44
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Crus cerebri
Fascicles of corticospinal fibres
Pyramid
Decussation of the pyramids
Lateral corticospinal tract
Ventral corticospinal tract*
Cerebral hemisphere
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cervical cord
Lumbar cord
Middle cerebellar peduncle
eFig. 9.54  Lateral and anterior corticospinal tracts. *Note that the ventral corticospinal tract (VCT) projects bilaterally. For further explanation, 
please review eTables 9.5 and 9.6. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.20. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1197 ===
e45
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Descending Tracts in the Spinal Cord
of these lower motor neurons then exit the spinal cord 
through the anterior root.
Tectospinal tract axons arise from cell bodies located in 
the superior colliculus of the dorsal midbrain (eFig. 9.56). 
These axons decussate in the dorsal tegmental decussation 
shortly after leaving the nucleus to form the tectospinal 
tract along the midline of the brainstem. The tectospinal 
tract continues through the brainstem near the medial 
longitudinal fasciculus and into cervical regions of the spinal 
cord near the anterior median fissure. Within the cervical 
spinal cord, axons project bilaterally to synapse on cell bodies 
of interneurons in the anterior horn gray matter. As the 
superior colliculus receives visual input, it is believed that 
the tectospinal tract modulates reflex postural movements 
in response to visual stimuli.
head and neck. Unlike the lateral motor system, the tracts 
in this system primarily project bilaterally on interneurons 
within the spinal cord. This makes it difficult to test each 
tract individually in the clinical system. We will briefly review 
the four tracts of the medial motor system beginning with 
the anterior corticospinal tract.
The anterior corticospinal tract is formed by the remaining 
descending upper motor neurons that did not decussate in 
the caudal medulla to form the lateral corticospinal tract. 
These upper motor neurons, which remain ipsilateral to 
form the anterior corticospinal tract, descend through the 
medial aspect of the anterior spinal cord to the level of the 
upper thoracic region (eFig. 9.54). These axons project 
bilaterally to synapse on cell bodies of lower motor neurons 
in the medial portion of the anterior horn gray matter. Axons 
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cervical cord
Red nucleus
Ventral tegmental decussation
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Pyramid
eFig. 9.55  Rubrospinal tract. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.21. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1198 ===
Neuroanatomy
e46
an example, the change in head position induced during 
tripping initiates extension of the upper limb and/or lower 
limb to prevent oneself from falling forward.
Reticulospinal tract axons arise from the reticular forma­
tion in the pons and medulla. The axons of the pontine and 
medullary reticulospinal tracts descend ipsilaterally through 
the length of the spinal cord in the anterior white matter 
and synapse with interneurons in the anterior horn gray 
matter. They are believed to function in regulating voluntary 
movements in reflex activity and autonomic outflow (eTables 
9.5 and 9.6).
Vestibulospinal tract axons arise from vestibular nuclei 
located in the pons and medulla. The medial vestibular 
nucleus gives rise to the medial vestibulospinal tract, which 
projects bilaterally to thoracic regions of the spinal cord, 
and the lateral vestibular nucleus gives rise to the lateral 
vestibulospinal tract, which descends ipsilaterally through 
the entire length of the spinal cord to synapse on interneu­
rons in the anterior horn gray matter (eFig. 9.57). Given 
that the vestibular nuclei receive sensory input from the 
inner ear and cerebellum, this tract facilitates activity of 
extensor/antigravity muscles and inhibits activity of flexor 
muscles to maintain balance and an upright posture. As 
Midbrain
Pons
Medulla
Cervical cord
Superior colliculus
Red nucleus
Periaqueductal grey
Dorsal tegmental decussation
Substantia nigra
Crus cerebri
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Pyramid
eFig. 9.56  Tectospinal tract. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.22. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1199 ===
e47
9 
Part V: Spinal Cord  •  Descending Tracts in the Spinal Cord
Pons
Medulla (rostral)
Medulla (caudal)
Cervical cord
Lumbar cord
Lateral vestibular nucleus
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Medial vestibular nucleus
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Medial longitudinal fasciculus
Pyramid
Inferior olivary nucleus
Medial lemniscus
eFig. 9.57  Medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 8.23. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1200 ===
Neuroanatomy
e48
VASCULAR SUPPLY TO THE SPINAL CORD
Vascular perfusions to the spinal cord are supplied by three 
longitudinally running vessels and several segmental 
branches. The longitudinally running vessels are the anterior 
spinal artery and two posterior spinal arteries. The posterior 
spinal arteries originate in the cranial cavity as branches 
of either the vertebral artery or PICA. These arteries descend 
along the length of the posterior spinal cord on the pos­
terolateral sulcus. The single anterior spinal artery originates 
within the cranial cavity from the union of two contributing 
branches from the vertebral arteries. The anterior spinal 
eTable 9.6  Medial motor systems
Tract
Site of origin
Site of decussation (where 
relevant)
Levels of termination
Function
Anterior 
corticospinal tract
Primary motor cortex and 
supplementary motor area
–
Cervical and upper 
thoracic cord
Control of bilateral axial and 
girdle muscles
Vestibulospinal 
tracts (VSTs)a
Medial VST: medial and inferior 
vestibular nuclei; lateral VST: 
lateral vestibular nucleus
–
Medial VST: cervical and 
upper thoracic cord; 
lateral VST: entire cord
Medial VST: positioning of head 
and neck; lateral VT: balance
Reticulospinal tracts
Pontine and medullary reticular 
formation
–
Entire cord
Automatic posture and 
gait-related movements
Tectospinal tract
Superior colliculus
Dorsal tegmental 
decussation, in the midbrain
Cervical cord
Coordination of head and eye 
movement (uncertain in humans)
aDespite their names, both medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts are medial motor systems.
(From Blumenfeld H. Neuroanatomy Through Clinical Cases. 2nd ed., Table 6.3, Part 2. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.; 2010.)
artery descends along the length of the anterior spinal cord 
on the anterior median fissure.
Reinforcing vascular supply to these longitudinally 
running vessels is provided by eight to ten segmental med­
ullary arteries. The largest segmental medullary artery is 
the artery of Adamkiewicz in the lower thoracic or upper 
lumbar region. This vessel is typically on the left side and 
contributes significantly to perfusion of the lower portion 
of the spinal cord.
Venous drainage of the spinal cord occurs through a series 
of longitudinally running channels that connect with the 
anterior and posterior spinal veins on the surface of the cord.
eTable 9.5  Lateral motor systems
Tract
Site of origin
Site of decussation (where relevant)
Levels of termination
Function
Lateral corticospinal 
tract
Primary motor cortex
Pyramidal decussation, at the 
cervicomedullary junction
Entire cord (predominantly 
at cervical and lumbosacral 
enlargements)
Movement of contralateral limbs
Rubrospinal tract
Red nucleus, 
magnocellular division
Ventral tegmental decussation, in 
the midbrain
Cervical cord
Movement of contralateral limbs 
(function is uncertain in humans)
(From Blumenfeld H. Neuroanatomy Through Clinical Cases 2nd ed., Table 6.3, Part 1. Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates, Inc.; 2010.)

=== PAGE 1201 ===
e49
9 
Part VI: Basal Nuclei  •  Corpus Striatum
morphology. To appreciate the three-dimensional shape of 
the basal nuclei and their relationship to surrounding 
structures, it is best to view them in horizontal and coronal 
brain sections taken at different levels of the brain.
CORPUS STRIATUM
The corpus striatum (Latin for “striped body”) includes the 
caudate nucleus and lentiform nucleus. This collection of 
structures received their name because of the striated 
appearance of bands that interconnect the caudate nucleus 
and putamen of the lentiform nucleus through the anterior 
limb of the internal capsule (eFig. 9.58).
The lentiform nucleus (Latin for “lens-shaped”) includes 
the globus pallidus and putamen, which appear lens-shaped 
when viewed laterally. Both of these structures are lateral to 
the internal capsule, which separates them from the thalamus 
Part VI: Basal nuclei
The basal nuclei are a collection of gray-matter structures 
named for their location deep within the base of the forebrain. 
Functionally, the basal nuclei have a significant role in 
controlling posture and voluntary movement through 
connections to the thalamus, cortex, and neighboring basal 
nuclei structures. In addition to their role in posture and 
movement, the basal nuclei have connections to limbic system 
pathways, which govern the expression of various behaviors 
and motivational states. For the purposes of this section, 
we will focus on reviewing the structures of the basal nuclei 
and pathways involved in controlling posture and voluntary 
movement.
A variety of terminology is used to refer to the structures 
of the basal nuclei individually and based on their collective 
Head of caudate nucleus
External capsule
Putamen
Extreme capsule
Claustrum
Cortex of insula
Anterior horn of lateral ventricle 
Anterior limb of internal capsule 
Lateral medullary lamina
External segment
Internal segment
Globus pallidus
Medial medullary lamina
Posterior limb of internal capsule
eFig. 9.58  Horizontal section of the brain showing the relationships of the corpus striatum. Mulligan’s stain has been used to increase the 
contrast between cell-rich areas (green/blue) and white matter. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 14.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2015.)

=== PAGE 1202 ===
Neuroanatomy
e50
and caudate nucleus medially (eFig. 9.58). Laterally, the 
putamen is bordered by the external capsule, a thin layer 
of white matter adjacent to a thin gray-matter layer called 
the claustrum. Beyond the claustrum is the external capsule, 
which borders the white matter of the insula (eFig. 9.58).
Medial to the internal capsule is the caudate nucleus. 
The caudate nucleus is a large C-shaped structure divided 
into a head, body, and tail, which closely follows the shape 
of the lateral ventricle (eFig. 9.58). Rostrally, the head of 
the caudate has a large rounded shape that contributes to 
the lateral wall of the anterior horn of the lateral ventricle 
(eFig. 9.58). Also at this level, the head of the caudate is 
continuous with the putamen (eFig. 9.59). Because of this 
Head of caudate
nucleus
Anterior limb of
internal capsule
Posterior limb of
internal capsule
Amygdala
Putamen
Body of caudate
nucleus
Tail of caudate
nucleus
Thalamus
Posterior
Anterior
eFig. 9.59  Lateral view of basal nuclei structures and thalamus. 
The vertical red lines highlight the course of the internal capsule. 
The globus pallidus and putamen are separated from the thalamus 
by the posterior limb of the internal capsule. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 14.4. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
close relationship the putamen and caudate are referred to 
collectively as the striatum. At the level of the interventricular 
foramen, the head of the caudate transitions to the body. 
The body of the caudate is long and narrows substantially 
as it transitions from the head to the tail (eFig. 9.59). Along 
its course the body contributes to the floor of the lateral 
ventricle. Near the posterior border of the thalamus the 
body of the caudate transitions into the tail. The tail con­
tinues anteriorly within the roof of the inferior horn of the 
lateral ventricle to terminate in the amygdaloid nucleus 
(eFig. 9.59).
CONNECTIONS OF THE BASAL NUCLEI
Input to the basal nuclei is primarily received by the striatum 
(caudate nucleus and putamen), and output predominantly 
leaves from the globus pallidus. Many structures send input 
to the striatum, including all areas of the cerebral cortex, 
thalamic nuclei, subthalamic nucleus, brainstem, and 
substantia nigra. To understand how the basal nuclei 
integrates all of this incoming information to influence motor 
activity, two simplified neuronal loops are described: the 
direct pathway and the indirect pathway.
The direct pathway has a series of connections through 
the basal nuclei, which result in an overall increase in motor 
activity. This pathway begins with input to the striatum, 
which sends axonal connections to the globus pallidus (eFig. 
9.60A). The globus pallidus then has output connections 
to the thalamus, which completes the circuit with axonal 
connections back to the cortex. The indirect pathway has 
a similar course, with the addition of output connections 
to the subthalamic nucleus, which results in an overall 
decrease in motor activity (eFig. 9.60B).

=== PAGE 1203 ===
e51
9 
Part VI: Basal Nuclei  •  Connections of the Basal Nuclei
1
2
3
4
5
Left motor cortex
Precentral sulcus
SMA
VLN
STN
CST/CRST
SNpc
GPi
GPe
Striatum
D1 receptors
(excitatory)
Corticostriate neuron
1
3
2
5
6
4
7
Left motor cortex
Precentral sulcus
SMA
VLN
STN
CST/CRST
SNpc
GPi
GPe
Striatum
D2 receptors
(inhibitory)
Corticostriate neuron
A
B
−
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
−
−
−
−
+
+
+
+
+
+
eFig. 9.60  Coronal section of the basal nuclei motor loop. A. Direct pathway. B. Indirect pathway. The red arrows represent excitatory neurons 
(glutamate). The black and gray arrows represent inhibitory neurons (GABA). The brown arrow represents dopamine-releasing nigrostriatal 
neurons, which is excitatory to D1 receptors on some striatal neurons and inhibitory to D2 receptors on other striatal neurons. CST/CRST, 
corticospinal, corticoreticular fibers; GPe, GPi, external and internal segments of globus pallidus; SMA, supplementary motor area; SNpc, 
compact part of the substantia nigra; STN, subthalamic nucleus; VLN, ventral lateral nucleus of the thalamus. (Modified from Mtui E. 
Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 33.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1204 ===
Neuroanatomy
e52
Midbrain
Primary fissure
Anterior
lobe
Posterior
lobe
Superior
vermis
    Hemisphere
eFig. 9.61  Cerebellum. Superior surface. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Cerebellar hemisphere
Midbrain
Pons
Superior cerebellar peduncle
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Pyramid
Olive
eFig. 9.62  Cerebellum. Lateral view of the cerebellum and cerebellar peduncles connecting to the brainstem. Portions of the cerebellar lobes 
are removed to highlight the peduncles. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Part VII: Cerebellum
The cerebellum is the largest structure of the hindbrain. It 
resides within the posterior cranial fossa and is composed 
of two large hemispheres, which are connected by the vermis 
in the midline (eFig. 9.61). Functionally, the cerebellum 
plays a role in maintaining balance and influencing posture 
and is responsible for coordinating movements by synchroniz­
ing contraction and relaxation of voluntary muscles. We 
will first examine the structural organization of the cerebel­
lum and then review how these structures contribute to 
the circuitry of the cerebellum.
STRUCTURES OF THE CEREBELLUM
Within the posterior cranial fossa, the cerebellum is covered 
by the tentorium cerebelli of the dura mater (eFig. 9.17) 
and connects to the posterior surface of the brainstem 
via the superior, middle, and inferior cerebellar peduncles 
(eFig. 9.62). Anteriorly, the cerebellum forms the roof of the 
fourth ventricle (eFig. 9.14). On its surface, the cerebellum 
has several convoluted folds, or folia, separated by fissures. 
Two of these fissures serve as landmarks to divide the 
cerebellum into three lobes. Superiorly, the primary fissure 
separates the anterior lobe from the posterior lobe (eFig. 
9.61). Anteriorly and inferiorly, the posterolateral fissure 
defines the structures of the flocculonodular lobe, which 
includes the flocculus from each hemisphere and nodule of 
the vermis (eFig. 9.63). A third fissure, the horizontal fissure, 
borders the superior and inferior surfaces of the cerebellum 
(eFig. 9.64).
Each fold or folia of the cerebellar cortex has a central 
core of white matter covered by a thin layer of gray matter 
superficially. In sections parallel to the median plane, the 
branching pattern of the folia can be appreciated; this is 
often referred to as the arbor vitae (eFig. 9.28). Deep within 
the white matter of each hemisphere are four masses of 
cerebellar nuclei. From lateral to medial they are the dentate, 
emboliform, globose, and fastigial (eFig. 9.65). Note that 
the emboliform and globose are collectively referred to as 

=== PAGE 1205 ===
e53
9 
Part VII: Cerebellum  •  Structures of the Cerebellum
Anterior lobe
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Middle cerebellar
peduncle
Posterolateral
fissure
Posterior lobe
Nodule 
Flocculus
Flocculonodular lobe 
Inferior cerebellar
peduncle
Tonsil
eFig. 9.63  Cerebellum. Anterior and inferior view. (From Crossman 
A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.4. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Superior
vermis
Hemisphere
Inferior
vermis
Medulla
Horizontal
fissure
eFig. 9.64  Cerebellum. Posterior view. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Cerebellar hemisphere
Globose nuclei
Emboliform nucleus
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Dentate nucleus
Fastigial nucleus
Pons
Fourth ventricle
eFig. 9.65  Cerebellum and brainstem. Horizontal section at the location of the fourth ventricle. Here, the four cerebellar nuclei can be seen. 
(From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.8. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1206 ===
Neuroanatomy
e54
(eFig. 9.67). From here, the granule cells send axons to the 
molecular layer, where they bifurcate into parallel fibers 
that run longitudinally in the folia. The parallel fibers then 
synapse on Purkinje cells in the outermost Purkinje cell 
layer (eFig. 9.67). Climbing fibers project to the Purkinje 
cell layer and form powerful excitatory connections with 
the Purkinje cells. The Purkinje cells then project to the 
deep cerebellar nuclei (eFig. 9.67).
AFFERENT CEREBELLAR PATHWAYS
As mentioned earlier, the cerebellum receives input from 
the cerebral cortex, brainstem, and spinal cord. Input from 
the cerebral cortex to the cerebellum is primarily involved 
in voluntary muscle control and coordination of movement. 
Axonal projections from the cerebral cortex destined for the 
cerebellum descend through the internal capsule and ter­
minate on pontine nuclei (eFig. 9.68). The axons from the 
pontine nuclei then cross over as transverse fibers to enter 
the interposed nuclei. Output from the cerebellum originates 
from one of these four nuclear complexes before leaving 
through the superior cerebellar peduncle, predominantly. 
In general, the output from each cerebellar hemisphere 
coordinates movement on the ipsilateral side of the body.
Functionally, the cerebellar cortex can be divided into 
three areas. The vermis in the midline influences movements 
along the axis of the body, including the neck, trunk, 
abdomen, and pelvis (eFig. 9.66). Adjacent to the vermis, 
the intermediate zone controls muscles of the distal upper 
and lower limbs. The lateral zone participates in motor 
planning to coordinate sequential movements of the entire 
body. Input to these functional areas of cerebellar cortex 
come from the cerebral cortex, spinal cord, and brainstem 
by passing predominantly through the middle and inferior 
cerebellar peduncles. Fibers entering the cerebellum proceed 
as mossy fibers (from various regions) or climbing fibers 
(from olivary nucleus). Mossy fibers form excitatory synapses 
with dendrites of the granule cells, in the granule cell layer 
A
C
B
Anterior lobe
representation
Neocerebellar
representation
Posterior lobe
representation
HI-V
HVI
HVIII
HVIIB
Crus I
Crus II
Flocc
Tons
D
F
T
Pyr
Uv
Nod
MOTOR/SENSORY
 
Sensorimotor task
 
Motor activation
 
Somatosensory activation
COGNITIVE
 
Language/verbal working memory
 
Spatial
 
Executive functions
 
Emotions
eFig. 9.66  Somatotopic map on the dorsal surface of the cerebellum. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 25.7A. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1207 ===
e55
9 
Part VII: Cerebellum  •  Afferent Cerebellar Pathways
To cerebellar nuclei
Climbing fibres from
inferior olivary nucleus
Mossy fibres
Molecular layer
Purkinje cell
Granular layer
Long axis of folium
Parallel fibres
Granule cell
Cerebellar cortex
White matter
eFig. 9.67  Connections of the cerebellum cortex. Afferent and efferent connections of the cerebellum and their connections to the cells of the 
cerebellar cortex. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.10. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Motor cortex
Ventral lateral nucleus of thalamus
Dentate nucleus
Pontine nuclei
Lateral corticospinal tract
Decussation of pyramids
Decussation of superior cerebellar peduncle
Purkinje cell
Pontocerebellar fibres
eFig. 9.68  Circuitry of the neocerebellum. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1208 ===
Neuroanatomy
e56
Globose and emboliform nuclei
Purkinje cell
Red nucleus
Rubrospinal tract
Dorsal spinocerebellar tract
Ventral spinocerebellar tract
Decussation of superior
cerebellar peduncle
Ventral tegmental decussation
eFig. 9.69  Circuitry of the paleocerebellum. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 11.12. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
the contralateral cerebellum through the middle cerebellar 
peduncle.
Input from the spinal cord to the cerebellum conveys 
information from muscles and joints to influence muscle 
tone and posture. The primary spinal cord pathways with 
connections to the cerebellum include the anterior or ventral 
spinocerebellar and the posterior or dorsal spinocerebellar 
tracts. These tracts originate from joint and cutaneous 
mechanoreceptors and ascend through the spinal cord to 
enter the ipsilateral cerebellum primarily through the inferior 
cerebellar peduncle (eFig. 9.69).
A final source of cerebellar input arises from the ves­
tibular nuclei and reticular formation in the brainstem. 
The connections are primarily involved in reflexive main­
tenance of balance. These nuclei send axonal projections 
to the ipsilateral cerebellum through the inferior cerebellar 
peduncle.
EFFERENT CEREBELLAR PATHWAYS
Output from the cerebellum originates from one of the four 
deep cerebellar nuclei. The largest collection of fibers leaving 
the cerebellum originates from the dentate nucleus. Axons 
from this nuclear complex project to the contralateral ventral 
nucleus of the thalamus after decussating in the superior 
cerebellar peduncle. From here, axons of the thalamic nuclei 
project to the motor cortex (eFig. 9.70). This pathway influ­
ences posture and movement.
The emboliform and globose nuclei, or interposed nuclei, 
have a similar course as the axons from the dentate, but 
with the addition of another synaptic target. Axons from 
the interposed nuclei decussate in the superior cerebellar 
peduncle to synapse on the contralateral ventral nucleus 
of the thalamus and the contralateral red nucleus in the 
midbrain (eFig. 9.70). Axons leaving the red nucleus descend 
to the inferior olivary nucleus in the medulla. The axonal 
projections from the interposed nuclei function in monitor­
ing and correcting motor activity of the upper and lower 
extremities.
Axons from the fastigial nucleus project to the vestibular 
nuclei, reticular formation, contralateral ventral nucleus of 
the thalamus, and contralateral tectum. Vestibular axons 
pass through the inferior cerebellar peduncle to reach the 
ipsilateral vestibular nucleus and uncinate fasciculus to 

=== PAGE 1209 ===
e57
9 
Part VII: Cerebellum  •  Vascular Supply
Motor cortex
Thalamus
Cerebellum
Dentate nucleus
Interposed nucleus
Fastigial nucleus
Vestibular nucleus
Red nucleus
Midbrain
Ventral lateral
nucleus of thalamus
Superior cerebellar
peduncle
Central tegmental tract
Reticular formation
Inferior olivary nucleus
eFig. 9.70  Cerebellar efferents. Arrows indicate the direction of impulse transmission. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., 
Fig. 25.10. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
reach the contralateral vestibular nucleus (eFig. 9.70). Also 
going through the inferior cerebellar peduncle are axons 
heading to the reticular formation. Ascending in the superior 
cerebellar peduncles are axons that will synapse with the 
contralateral tectum and contralateral ventral nucleus of the 
thalamus.
VASCULAR SUPPLY
The cerebellum is perfused by the vertebrobasilar system 
of arteries (eFig. 9.42). Before merging and forming the 
basilar artery, each vertebral artery gives rise to a PICA and 
posterior spinal artery and contributes to the formation of 
the anterior spinal artery (eFig. 9.71). The PICA perfuses 
the inferior portion of the cerebellum. At the level of the 
caudal pons, the AICA branches off the basilar artery and 
perfuses the anterior and lateral portion of the cerebellum, 
as well as the middle and inferior cerebellar peduncles (eFig. 
9.71). Just before the midbrain, the superior cerebellar 
arteries branch off of the basilar artery and supply the 
superior cerebellar peduncles and superior portion of the 
cerebellar hemispheres (eFig. 9.71).
Posterior
communicating
Posterior
cerebral
Anterior spinal
Vertebral
Superior
cerebellar
Anterior
inferior
cerebellar
Posterior
inferior
cerebellar
Pontine
Basilar
Labyrinthine
Internal carotid
eFig. 9.71  Vascular supply to the hindbrain. (From Mtui E. 
Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 5.10. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1210 ===
Neuroanatomy
e58
the anterior chamber and the pupil, a small central aperture 
that controls how much light is admitted into the eye. After 
passing through the pupil light is refracted through the lens, 
which along with the ciliary body, separates the anterior 
portion of the eye from the posterior portion (eFig. 9.72). The 
lens is a clear biconvex structure that rounds in shape as the 
ciliary muscle contracts and relaxes the suspensory ligaments 
attached to the borders of the lens, a parasympathetically 
controlled process referred to as accommodation.
After the lens, light passes through the vitreous humor 
of the posterior chamber and is projected onto the layers 
of the retina (eFig. 9.73). The retina is composed of a non-
neural layer and several layers of neural cells with synaptic 
connections. To reduce the amount of light reflected in the 
eye, the choroid layer lining the inner surface of the sclera 
(eFig. 9.72), along with the pigment epithelium layer (non-
neural) of the retina, absorb and refract some of the light 
stimulus (eFig. 9.73). Interdigitating between the pigment 
Part VIII: Visual System
The visual system is a complex special sensory system that 
begins in the eyeball and has neuronal connections to the 
thalamus, brainstem, primary visual cortex, and association 
cortices. In addition to mediating visual perception, these 
connections are also involved in higher visual functions, 
such as determining spatial relationships between objects 
and structural features of objects. In this section we will 
explore the primary or geniculate visual pathway from the 
retina to the primary visual cortex.
Although the retinal layer of the eyeball is often considered 
the beginning of visual perception, the anterior structures 
of the eye play an important role in visual perception too. 
The anteriormost structure is the cornea and is the first layer 
through which light, the visual stimulus, enters the eye (eFig. 
9.72). This transparent layer overlies the aqueous humor of 
Optic nerve
Subarachnoid
space
Optic papilla
Choroid
Retina
Sclera
Ciliary body
Ciliary body
Cornea
Visual axis
Iris
Lens
Aqueous humor
Vitreous humor
Suspensory ligaments
Ciliary
muscle
Fovea 
Central vessels of retina
Dura arachnoid
eFig. 9.72  Right eye. Horizontal section displaying the visual axis. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 28.2. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1211 ===
e59
9 
Part VIII: Visual System  •  Central Visual Pathway
pathway. Two other cell types present in the retina are 
horizontal and amacrine cells. These transversely oriented 
interneurons moderate the excitation level of bipolar and 
ganglion cells.
CENTRAL VISUAL PATHWAY
Axons from the ganglion cells coalesce at the optic disc, 
which is absent of photoreceptors and thus creates a blind 
spot in the visual field. As they leave the optic disc they form 
the optic nerve, acquire a myelin sheath provided by oligo­
dendrocytes, and are invested by the cranial meninges (eFig. 
9.72). These morphological features derived during embry­
onic development, define the optic nerve as a component 
of the CNS. Anterior to the infundibular stalk, the optic 
nerves converge at the optic chiasm. Within the chiasm, 
axons from the nasal portion of the retina decussate and 
enter into the contralateral optic tract (eFig. 9.75). Con­
versely, axons from the temporal portion of the retina stay 
ipsilateral to enter the ipsilateral optic tract (eFig. 9.75).
Continuing posteriorly, the optic tracts course around 
the midbrain to enter the lateral geniculate nucleus of the 
thalamus (eFig. 9.75). At this level, a small portion of the 
fibers from the optic tract travel to the pretectal area and 
superior colliculus to mediate the pupillary light reflex. 
Axons leaving the lateral geniculate nucleus form the 
epithelial cells, the photoreceptors transduce the light 
stimulus into an electrical signal in a process called photo­
transduction. Images formed on the retina are inverted in 
both vertical and lateral dimensions (eFig. 9.74). Because 
of this, the visual field is defined as having four quadrants: 
left/right and upper/lower.
Photoreceptors include rods, which are very sensitive to 
light and essential for vision in dimly lit conditions, and 
cones, which are responsible for color vision and high visual 
acuity. Although rods and cones are both distributed across 
the retina, rods outnumber cones by twentyfold and are 
concentrated in the periphery of the retina. Cones predomi­
nate near the macula and are the only photoreceptors present 
at the fovea (eFig. 9.72). The fovea represents the primary 
visual axis of the eye and is the location of maximal visual 
acuity. Despite their functional differences, both the rods 
and cones have an outer light-sensing segment, an inner 
segment, and a synaptic terminal. These synaptic terminals 
contact bipolar cells, the first-order neurons in the visual 
pathway (eFig. 9.73). Bipolar cells then synapse with 
ganglion cells, the second-order neurons in the visual 
Optic nerve
Amacrine cell
Bipolar neuron
Ganglion cell
Light
Horizontal cell
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
eFig. 9.73  Retinal layers. (1) Pigment layer; (2) photoreceptor 
layer; (3) outer nuclear layer; (4) outer plexiform layer; (5) inner 
nuclear layer; (6) inner plexiform layer; (7) ganglion cell layer; (8) 
nerve fiber layer. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 
7th ed., Fig. 28.4. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
eFig. 9.74  Visual field projected on the retina. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 15.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1212 ===
Neuroanatomy
e60
Lateral geniculate nucleus
of thalamus
Inferior horn of
lateral ventricle
Meyer’s loop
Lower visual field fibres
Upper visual field fibres
eFig. 9.76  Thalamocortical fibers projecting to the primary visual cortex from the lateral geniculate nucleus. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 
5th ed., Fig. 15.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
optic radiations, which continue on to the primary visual 
cortex in the occipital lobe (eFig. 9.76). Fibers traveling in 
the lower portion of the optic radiations terminate on the 
lower half of the primary visual cortex, whereas fibers in 
the upper portion terminate on the upper half of the cortex 
(eFig. 9.76). A full review of how the visual field is repre­
sented throughout the visual pathway can be reviewed in 
eFig. 9.77.
As mentioned previously, images formed on the retina 
are inverted in both vertical and lateral dimensions. In 
addition, the fibers from the nasal portion of the hemiretina 
decussate at the optic chiasm. Because of this, the optic 
tracts, thalamus, optic radiations, and primary visual cortex 
receive information relating only to the contralateral half 
of the visual field. Knowledge of how the visual field is 
represented throughout the visual pathway is essential for 
identifying the location of lesions in patients with visual 
field deficits. Examples of lesions in the five major structures 
of the visual pathway (optic nerve, optic chiasm, optic tract, 
optic radiations, primary visual cortex) and their associated 
visual field deficits are represented in eFig. 9.78.
Visual fields
Midbrain
Lateral geniculate
nucleus
Retina
Optic nerve
Optic tract
Optic
radiation
Primary visual
cortex
eFig. 9.75  Visual pathways. The visual fields from the left and 
right eyes are represented distinctly, without the normal 
intersection. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th 
ed., Fig. 28.9. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1213 ===
e61
9 
Part VIII: Visual System  •  Central Visual Pathway
Visual field
Representation of
visual field upon
retinae
Right lateral
geniculate nucleus
Right visual cortex
L
R
Macula
Parieto-occipital
sulcus
Calcarine sulcus
eFig. 9.77  Representation of the left half of the visual field at various portions along the visual pathway. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 
5th ed., Fig. 15.7. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Nasal
Visual fields
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Left
eye
Left
Right
eFig. 9.78  Visual field deficits experienced with lesions along the visual pathway. 1, ipsilateral monocular scotoma; 2, monocular blindness/
visual loss; 3, bitemporal hemianopia; 4, contralateral homonymous hemianopia; 5, contralateral homonymous superior quadrantanopia; 6 and 
7, contralateral homonymous hemianopia with macular sparing; 8, bilateral central scotoma. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 
7th ed., Fig. 28.11. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1214 ===
Neuroanatomy
e62
pressure waves at the oval window of the fluid-filled cochlea. 
To prevent damage from loud or high-decibel sounds, move­
ments of the malleus and stapes are reduced by the tensor 
tympani and stapedius muscles.
COCHLEA
In the cochlea, sound waves are converted into an electrical 
signal at the organ of Corti. The organ of Corti rests upon 
the basilar membrane in the scala media, which is filled 
with endolymph (eFig. 9.80). In addition to contributing 
to the formation of the scala media with the vestibular 
membrane, the basilar membrane separates the cochlea into 
the scala vestibuli and scala tympani, which are filled with 
perilymph and are continuous with one another at the 
helicotrema (eFig. 9.80).
As the sound waves move through the perilymph they 
displace the basilar membrane, which causes deflection of 
the hair cells in the organ of Corti (eFig. 9.81A). These 
sensory receptors synapse with sensory neurons, which 
have cell bodies in spiral ganglion located within the modiolus 
of the cochlea (eFig. 9.80). Axons leaving the modiolus 
form the cochlear nerve near the base of the cochlea. The 
Part IX: Auditory and 
vestibular system
Cranial nerve VIII, the vestibulocochlear nerve, conveys 
sensory information from the vestibular and auditory organs 
of the inner ear to the pontomedullary junction of the 
brainstem. Although these sensory modalities are conveyed 
to the brainstem by a common nerve bundle, each of these 
sensory functions has different central pathways. In this 
section we will first review the central auditory pathways 
and then the vestibular pathways.
AUDITORY PATHWAYS
Sound waves, the auditory stimulus, are directed toward 
the external acoustic meatus by the pinna of the outer ear 
and through the ear canal to the tympanic membrane (eFig. 
9.79). Vibration of the tympanic membrane, induced by 
the incoming sound waves, is transmitted to the three ossicle 
bones (malleus, incus, and stapes) of the middle ear. These 
bones amplify sound waves so they can be converted to 
Middle ear
ossicles
Vestibule
Bone
Semicircular canals:
Horizontal
Posterior
Anterior
Vestibular nerve
Facial nerve
Bone
Cochlear nerve
Ear canal
Bone
Cochlea
auditory
(Eustachian)
tube
Nasopharynx
Round window
Middle ear cavity
Oval window
with stapes
Drum
membrane
Cartilage
eFig. 9.79  Schematic drawing of the right outer, middle, and inner ear. The cochlea of the inner ear is located within the temporal bone. (From 
Nolte J Fig. 14-1; from Brödel M. Three Unpublished Drawings of the Anatomy of the Human Ear. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders; 1946.)

=== PAGE 1215 ===
e63
9 
Part IX: Auditory and Vestibular System  •  Central Auditory Pathways
cochlear nerve then passes through the internal acoustic 
meatus and subarachnoid space to enter the pontomedullary 
junction at the cerebellopontine angle.
CENTRAL AUDITORY PATHWAYS
The first-order axons entering the brainstem from the cochlea 
terminate ipsilaterally on the dorsal and ventral cochlear 
nuclei. From here, second-order axons have several synaptic 
targets. Second-order axons forming the ascending auditory 
pathway ascend to the pons and project bilaterally on the 
superior olivary nucleus (eFig. 9.82). These bilateral projec­
tions are important for auditory acuity and localizing the 
origin of a sound. From here, fibers continue to ascend as 
the lateral lemniscus and terminate in the inferior colliculus 
of the midbrain. Axons leaving the inferior colliculus then 
have a synaptic relay in the medial geniculate nucleus of 
the thalamus before reaching the final synaptic target: the 
primary auditory cortex (superior temporal gyrus) of the 
temporal lobe (eFig. 9.82). Throughout this pathway, from 
the basilar membrane to the primary auditory cortex, audi­
tory stimuli are tonotopically represented. This is analogous 
to the somatotopic map previously discussed in the section 
on somatosensory systems pathways.
In addition to the ascending auditory pathway, the 
superior olivary nucleus receives descending input from the 
Organ 
of Corti
Bone
Modiolus
Vestibular
membrane
Helicotrema
Scala vestibuli
Scala 
tympani
Scala media
Spiral ganglion
Internal acoustic meatus
Cochlear nerve
Osseous spiral
lamina
Basilar membrane
Spiral ligament
eFig. 9.80  Sagittal section of the cochlea in the temporal bone. 
(From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 20.1. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Scala vestibuli
Scala media
Scala tympani
Spiral 
ligament
Basilar membrane
Organ of 
Corti
Tunnel of Corti
Osseous spiral 
lamina
Tectorial 
membrane
Inner hair cell
Outer hair cell
Stereocilium
Ribbon synapse
OCB
OCB
eFig. 9.81  Overview of the organ of Corti with a magnified view of 
the hair cells and their connections to the olivocochlear bundle 
(OCB). The arrows specify the direction of impulse propagation 
along the length of the axon. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 20.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1216 ===
Neuroanatomy
e64
Cochlea
Spiral ganglion
Cochlear nerve
Ventral cochlear nucleus
Dorsal cochlear nucleus
Pyramid
Inferior olivary nucleus
Inferior cerebellar peduncle
Trapezoid body
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Superior olivary nucleus
Crus cerebri
Middle cerebellar peduncle
Inferior colliculus
Substantia nigra
Medial geniculate nucleus
Superior temporal gyrus
Temporal lobe
Cerebral hemisphere
Rostral midbrain
Caudal midbrain
Pons
Medulla
eFig. 9.82  Ascending connections of the auditory nerve of the vestibulocochlear nerve (CN VIII). (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., 
Fig. 10.22. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1217 ===
e65
9 
Part IX: Auditory and Vestibular System  •  Vestibular Pathways
primary auditory cortex as a form of feedback (eFig. 9.82). 
The superior olivary nucleus then sends descending olivo­
cochlear fibers to the organ of Corti, which has an inhibitory 
function on the hair cells to prevent damage from harmfully 
loud sounds. It is also believed that the superior olivary 
nucleus has connections with the motor nuclei of the tri­
geminal and facial nerve to mediate reflexive contraction 
of the tensor tympani and stapedius muscles in response 
to loud sounds.
VESTIBULAR PATHWAYS
The vestibular nerve transmits afferent or sensory informa­
tion regarding movement and position of the head from the 
vestibular organs, which include semicircular ducts, utricle, 
and saccule. Like the cochlear apparatus, each of these 
vestibular organs is located within a membranous (ductal) 
portion of the vestibular apparatus, which is surrounded 
by a bony (canal) portion (eFig. 9.83). The cell bodies for 
these sensory receptors are located in the vestibular (Scarpa’s) 
ganglion within the internal acoustic meatus (eFig. 9.83). 
The vestibular nerve then passes through the internal 
acoustic meatus and subarachnoid space to enter the 
pontomedullary junction at the cerebellopontine angle.
Central vestibular pathways
The central processes of the vestibular axons predominantly 
terminate in the four vestibular nuclei (superior, inferior, 
medial, and lateral), which are located in the rostral medulla 
and caudal pons (eFig. 9.40). Axons leaving the vestibular 
nuclei have several ascending and descending synaptic 
targets. These pathways connect with visual motor, descend­
ing motor, and cerebellar pathways to coordinate movement 
and maintain posture and balance (eFig. 9.84).
Axons ascending after leaving the vestibular nuclei form 
the medial longitudinal fasciculus to reach the oculomotor, 
trochlear, and abducent nuclei (eFig. 9.85). These connec­
tions coordinate movement of the head and eyes so that 
visual fixation on an object can be maintained. Other axons 
ascending from the vestibular nuclei project to the cerebral 
Cochlea
Superior semicircular canal
Posterior semicircular canal
Lateral semicircular canal
Vestibulocochlear nerve
eFig. 9.83  Bony labyrinth. Superior view of the cochlea and 
semicircular canals. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 19.1. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
cortex after a synaptic relay in the ventral posterior nucleus 
of the thalamus (eFig. 9.84B). This connection assists in 
consciously orienting oneself in space. In addition to these 
connections, axons leaving the vestibular nuclei pass through 
the inferior cerebellar peduncle to reach the cerebellum and 
modulate equilibrium (eFig. 9.84B).
Axons descending after leaving the vestibular nuclei form 
the medial and lateral vestibulospinal tracts ipsilaterally 
(eFig. 9.84B). As mentioned in the previous section on medial 
motor systems in the spinal cord, the axons in these pathways 
synapse on interneurons within the anterior horn gray 
matter to influence spinal motor neuron activity and 
maintain posture and balance.

=== PAGE 1218 ===
Neuroanatomy
e66
To the thalamus 
LVST 
MVST 
MLF
To the
cerebellum
3
4
6
ICP 
J
7
L
6
SO
SVN
SpV
IVN
DCN
VCN
MVN
SpV
ICP 
Utricle, saccule, 
semicircular ducts 
From the spinal cord 
From the
cerebellum
S
L
M
I
Cochlear nuclei 
Vestibular nuclei 
Vestibular ganglion 
C
D
MLF
A
B
C
D
eFig. 9.84  Vestibular nuclei connections. Inputs (A) and outputs (B). C and D refer to cross-sections of the medulla (C) and pons (D) showing 
the vestibular nuclei. 3, oculomotor nucleus; 4, trochlear nucleus; 6, abducens nucleus; 7, facial motor nucleus; DCN, dorsal cochlear nucleus; I 
and IVN, inferior vestibular nucleus; ICP, inferior cerebellar peduncle; J, juxtarestiform body; L, lateral vestibular nucleus; LVST, lateral 
vestibulospinal tract; M and MVN, medial vestibular nucleus; MLF, medial longitudinal fasciculus; MVST, medial vestibulospinal tract; S and 
SVN, superior vestibular nucleus; SO, superior olivary nucleus; SpV, spinal trigeminal nucleus; VCN, ventral cochlear nucleus. (From Nolte J. The 
Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 14.29. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1219 ===
e67
9 
Part IX: Auditory and Vestibular System  •  Vestibular Pathways
To left lateral 
rectus
To right medial 
rectus
Oculomotor nucleus
Internuclear neuron
Cerebellar connections
Passive displacement 
of endolymph
Direction of head rotation
Medial vestibular nucleus
Abducens nucleus
Lateral semicircular duct
VIII nerve
Paramedian 
pontine 
reticular 
formation
eFig. 9.85  Coordination of head and eye movement. A rightward head turn stimulates the right medial vestibular nucleus to send impulses to 
the contralateral paramedian pontine reticular formation (PPRF). The PPRF sends impulses to the abducens motor neurons innervating the left 
lateral rectus and also sends internuclear fibers to the right medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF). The MLF projects to the right oculomotor 
nucleus, which sends axons to innervate the right medial rectus. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 19.5. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1220 ===
Neuroanatomy
e68
BORDERS OF THE HYPOTHALAMUS
Located in the ventralmost aspect of the diencephalon, the 
hypothalamus is bounded by the lamina terminalis anteriorly, 
the hypothalamic sulcus superiorly, and the tegmentum 
of the midbrain posteriorly (eFig. 9.87). Laterally the 
hypothalamus is bordered by the substantia innominata 
rostrally and the posterior limb of the internal capsule 
caudally. It forms the floor in addition to the lower portion 
of the lateral walls in the third ventricle. When viewing the 
external surface of the ventral brain, the area containing the 
Part X: Hypothalamus
The hypothalamus is a neuroendocrine organ that regulates 
physiological processes for survival such as consumption 
of fluid and food, temperature control, the sleep–wake cycle, 
growth, and reproduction. As a result of this vast array of 
functions, the nuclei of the hypothalamus make connections 
with several other neural and endocrine structures in the 
body (eFig. 9.86). In this section we will explore the nuclei 
of the hypothalamus and their main connections.
Upper motor neurons
Prefrontal cortex
Reflexes,
motor programs
Lower motor neuron
Skeletal muscle
Hypothalamus
Reflexes,
motor programs
Limbic structures
Cerebellum
Basal ganglia
Autonomic motor neuron
Autonomic ganglion
Smooth muscle,
cardiac muscle, glands
Afferent inputs
Pituitary gland
Hormonal response
eFig. 9.86  Overview of functions regulated by the hypothalamus. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 23-2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016.)

=== PAGE 1221 ===
e69
9 
Part X: Hypothalamus  •  Functional Divisions of the Hypothalamus
hormone synthesis and release. Releasing and inhibiting 
factors synthesized by the hypothalamus pass through 
these portal vessels via the tuberoinfundibular tract (eFig. 
9.89) to reach the anterior pituitary (adenohypophysis) 
and control release of hormones produced by the anterior 
pituitary such as adrenocorticotropic hormone, lutein­
izing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, thyroid-
stimulating hormone, growth hormone, and prolactin 
(eFig. 9.90).
A second connection exists between the hypothalamus 
and pituitary through nerve fibers, which originate in the 
supraoptic region and paraventricular nuclei of the medial 
hypothalamus and extend through the hypothalamohy­
pophyseal tract to the posterior lobe of the pituitary for 
release into the circulatory system (eFig. 9.89).
FUNCTIONAL DIVISIONS OF THE 
HYPOTHALAMUS
Internally, the hypothalamus is composed of many small 
nuclei, which are divided by a parasagittal plane into a medial 
and lateral zone. Landmarks for this dividing point are the 
columns of the fornix and the mammillothalamic tract as 
they reside within this sagittal plane (eFig. 9.91). The 
hypothalamus is also divided by coronal planes into a preoptic 
area and periventricular zone. Note that the periventricular 
zone is not to be confused with the paraventricular nucleus, 
which is a thin region of cell bodies lying medial to the 
medial zone.
Lateral zone
Within the lateral zone of the hypothalamus is a large bundle 
of axons forming the medial forebrain bundle (MFB) (eFig. 
9.90). Theses fibers interconnect the hypothalamus with 
the septal nuclei rostrally and nuclear complexes within 
the brainstem. Axons arising from the large lateral nucleus 
in this zone enter the MFB and function in promoting feeding 
behavior. The other and smaller nuclear group in this zone 
is the tuberal group. Axons from the tuberal nuclei make 
connections with the anterior pituitary through the tuber­
oinfundibular tract to regulate release of hormones in the 
hypophysial portal system and to the cerebellum to regulate 
motor activity (eFig. 9.89).
Medial zone
The medial zone is divided into three regions: supraoptic, 
tuberal, and mammillary. There are four nuclei in the 
supraoptic region, which play a role in thermoregulation, 
osmoregulation, and the sleep–wake cycle. The supraop­
tic and paraventricular nuclei in this region synthesize 
antidiuretic hormone or vasopressin, which stimulates water 
Mammillothalamic tract
DN
Hypothalamic sulcus
Interventricular foramen
Fornix
Anterior commissure
Lamina 
terminalis
Preoptic 
nucleus
Supraoptic 
nucleus
Supra-
chiasmatic 
nucleus
Infundibulum
Optic chiasm
Middle lobe
Dura mater
Sphenoid 
bone
Adenohypophysis
Neurohypophysis
Arcuate 
nucleus
Median eminence
TN
MB
PN
DMN
PVN
VMN
Hypophyseal
stalk
eFig. 9.87  Lateral view of hypothalamic nuclei. DMN, dorsomedial 
nucleus; DN, dorsal nucleus; MB, mammillary body; PN, 
posterior nucleus; PVN, paraventricular nucleus; TN, 
tuberomammillary nucleus; VMN, ventromedial nucleus. The 
pink structure represents the lateral hypothalamic nucleus. (From 
Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 26.1. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
hypothalamus is circumscribed by the optic chiasm, optic 
tract, crus cerebri, and caudal edge of the mammillary bodies 
(eFig. 9.88).
CONNECTIONS TO THE PITUITARY
Continuous with the hypothalamus inferiorly is the pituitary 
gland. These two structures are connected by the infun­
dibulum and hypophysial stalk just caudal to the optic 
chiasm (eFig. 9.87). The intimate relationship of the hypo­
thalamus to the portal circulation of the pituitary gland 
allows the hypothalamus to be an efficient regulator of 

=== PAGE 1222 ===
Neuroanatomy
e70
Optic tract
Lateral olfactory stria
Frontal lobe
Olfactory tract
Olfactory bulb
Anterior perforated substance 
Mammillary body
Uncus 
Pons
Parahippocampal gyrus
Posterior perforated substance
Crus cerebri
Optic nerve
eFig. 9.88  Structures bordering the hypothalamus. On the ventral surface of the brain, the hypothalamus is bordered by the optic chiasm, 
optic tract, crus cerebri, and mammillary bodies. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 16.17. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)

=== PAGE 1223 ===
e71
9 
Part X: Hypothalamus  •  Functional Divisions of the Hypothalamus
Paraventricular nucleus
Ventromedial nucleus
Preoptic nucleus
Supraoptic nucleus
Tuberoinfundibular
tract
Capillary loops
Superior hypophyseal 
artery
Inferior 
hypophyseal
artery
Portal vessel
Adenohypophysis
Endocrine cells
Cavernous sinus
Arcuate nucleus
Hypothalamo-
hypophyseal
tract
Neurohypophysis
eFig. 9.89  Hypothalamic neuroendocrine connections to the portal 
system. Arrow designates the direction of blood flow to the portal 
system. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., 
Fig. 26.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
PAR
DMN
Third
ventricle
PVN
LN
DMN
VMN
PER
ARC
PER
VMN
ARC
LN
Optic tract
ZI
Internal capsule
Fornix
Globus pallidus
MFB
Plane of section
eFig. 9.90  Hypothalamic nuclei. Coronal section of hypothalamic 
nuclei and their associated neural pathways. ARC, arcuate nucleus; 
DMN, dorsomedial nucleus; LN, lateral nucleus; MFB, medial 
forebrain bundle; PAR, paraventricular nucleus; PER, periventricular 
nucleus; VMN, ventromedial nucleus; ZI, zona incerta. (From Mtui 
E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 26.2. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
uptake and oxytocin for stimulation of uterine contractions 
and lactation in the mammary glands. Axons from these 
nuclei are conveyed by the hypothalamohypophyseal tract 
to the posterior pituitary for release into the circulatory 
system (eFig. 9.89). A third nuclear group in this region is 
the suprachiasmatic nucleus. This nucleus receives input 
directly from the retina to influence circadian rhythms, which 
contribute to the light–dark cycle. The anterior nucleus is the 
final group and functions predominantly in regulating body 
temperature.
The tuberal region in the medial zone contains three 
nuclei: ventromedial, dorsomedial, and arcuate. The largest 
and best defined is the ventromedial nucleus, which functions 
as a satiety center to decrease feeding behavior. Posterior 
to the ventromedial nucleus is the dorsomedial nucleus, 
which functions in the behavioral expression of rage or 
aggressive behavior. Finally, the arcuate nucleus serves as 
a center for releasing hormones, which are transmitted by 
the tuberoinfundibular tract and hypophysial portal system 
to the anterior pituitary (eFig. 9.89).
The mammillary region or mammillary body is the final 
group of nuclei in the medial zone. Four nuclei comprise 
this region: medial, intermediate, lateral mammillary, and 
posterior hypothalamic. The best defined is the medial 
mammillary nucleus, as it is the primary site for the termina­
tion of axons from the postcommissural fornix. This pathway 
originates from the subiculum of the hippocampal complex 

=== PAGE 1224 ===
Neuroanatomy
e72
Mammillothalamic
tract
Anterior nucleus of thalamus
Cingulum
Corpus callosum
Anterior horn
of lateral ventricle
Body of fornix
Mammillary body
Column of fornix
eFig. 9.91  Diencephalon. Medial dissection of the diencephalon exposing the fornix and its relationship to the mammillary body and 
mammillothalamic tract. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 16.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Hypothalamus
Pituitary
Motor behaviour
Hormones
Homeostasis
Autonomic NS
Reticular formation
Thalamus
Limbic system
Orbitofrontal cortex
Nucleus accumbens
Internal organ
control
Wakefulness/sleep
B
Hypothalamus
Circulating blood
Amygdala
Physical, chemical
and hormonal state
Nucleus
solitarius
Brainstem
reticular
formation
Thalamus
Hippocampus
Autonomic
nervous system
Brainstem
monoaminergic
nuclei
A
eFig. 9.92  Neural and non-neural connection of the hypothalamus. A. Inputs. B. Outputs. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 16.4. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
and plays a key role in memory. The medial mammillary 
nuclei also connects to structures of the limbic system.
Periventricular zone
The periventricular zone resides medial to the medial zone 
and adjacent to the ependymal cells of the third ventricle. 
Neurons from this zone predominantly synthesize releasing 
hormones. Axons from these neuronal cells project through 
the tuberoinfundibular tract to the hypophysial portal 
system to influence release of hormones from the anterior 
pituitary.
SUMMARY OF CONNECTIONS
Through the review of the hypothalamus thus far, it is 
apparent that this small, 4-gram structure has a significant 
role in regulating visceral, endocrine, and behavioral system 
functions through multiple pathways. It is important to 
remember the majority of the pathways mentioned represent 
input–output relationships between the hypothalamus and 
other structures. For a review of neural and non-neural 
inputs and outputs, refer to the summary figures (eFig. 
9.92A and B).

=== PAGE 1225 ===
e73
9 
Part XI: Olfactory and Limbic System  •  Limbic System
Part XI: Olfactory and 
limbic system
OLFACTORY SYSTEM
The sense of olfaction has a role in both pleasurable experi­
ences and survival. The same receptors that allow us to 
enjoy the food we consume or experience odorants in the 
environment also help us avoid spoiled food or potentially 
hazardous situations like a fire. Unlike the other special 
sensory system pathways, the olfactory sensory pathway 
is unique in that it does not have a thalamic relay before 
reaching the primary olfactory cortex. In this section we 
will review the course of the neurons in the olfactory system 
and their connection to the limbic system.
Three types of olfactory receptors make up the olfactory 
epithelium along the lateral and septal walls of the nasal 
cavity. These cells allow for regeneration (basal stem cells), 
support (sustentacular cells), and transmission of informa­
tion (olfactory receptor neurons). Each olfactory receptor 
neuron has an olfactory vesicle with cilia that contain 
receptors for odorant molecules and an unmyelinated axon 
that passes through the cribriform plate to terminate in the 
olfactory bulb (eFig. 9.93). As the olfactory receptor neurons 
Granule cell
Olfactory tract
Mitral cell
Periglomerular cell
Glomerulus
Cribriform plate
Olfactory nerve fibre
Basal cell
Sustentacular cell
Bipolar neuron
1
2
eFig. 9.93  Cellular connections of the olfactory epithelium. (From 
Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.1. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
originate embryologically from the CNS, they are considered 
part of the CNS and not the PNS.
After synapsing with the mitral cells in the glomeruli of 
the olfactory bulb, mitral cell axons converge to form the 
olfactory tract. The olfactory tract then divides into medial 
and lateral olfactory striae to reach different synaptic targets 
(eFig. 9.94). Some of the axons in the medial olfactory striae 
travel through the diagonal band to reach the septal area, 
whereas others cross the midline in the anterior commissure 
and inhibit mitral cell activity in the contralateral olfactory 
bulb to enhance localization of the olfactory stimulant. 
Axons in the lateral olfactory stria primarily terminate in 
the piriform cortex/primary olfactory cortex of the uncus 
and in the amygdala (eFig. 9.94).
The medial forebrain bundle, traveling through the lateral 
hypothalamus, connects the olfactory cortex with both the 
hypothalamus and the brainstem to regulate autonomic 
responses such as arousal through the reticular formation, 
salivation, and gastric contraction.
LIMBIC SYSTEM
The limbic system is composed of several cortical and 
subcortical structures that participate in an intricate network 
of connections to regulate complicated behaviors such as 
memory, emotions, homeostatic functions, and motivational 
state. In this section we will review the major structures 
and pathways that form the limbic system.
Grossly, the limbic lobe includes a ring-shaped area of 
cortical structures that border the brainstem. These cortical 
areas include the cingulate gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus, 
and subcallosal area (eFig. 9.12). Laterally, the insular cortex 
also participates in limbic system function (eFig. 9.10). 
Nuclear structures of the limbic system include the amygdala, 
hippocampal formation, anterior and mediodorsal thalamic 
nuclei, septal nuclei in the forebrain, and nucleus accumbens 
(eFig. 9.95).
Amygdala
The amygdaloid nucleus is an almond-shaped structure 
located anterior to the inferior horn of the lateral ventricle 
and tail of the caudate within the temporal lobe (eFig. 9.96). 
Structurally, the amygdala consists of three nuclear regions: 
a large basolateral group and a smaller corticomedial group, 
which includes the central nucleus. Functionally, the 
amygdala is primarily associated with the emotion of fear, 
but it also has an important role in autonomic and neuro­
endocrine pathways. Connections of the amygdala are 
predominantly bidirectional and follow three different 
pathways: the uncinate fasciculus, stria terminalis, and 
ventral amygdalofugal pathway (eFig. 9.97). Connections 
to cortical areas pass through the uncinate fasciculus, which 

=== PAGE 1226 ===
Neuroanatomy
e74
Septal area
Anterior commissure
Precommissural fornix
Cingulate gyrus
Anterior nucleus of thalamus
Fornix
DMN
Dentate gyrus
Entorhinal cortex
Hippocampus
Amygdala
Temporal polar cortex
Orbital cortex
Nucleus accumbens
Mammillary body
eFig. 9.95  Medial view of the right cerebral cortical areas included in the limbic cortex. Subcortical limbic structures are also defined. DMN, 
dorsal medial nucleus of the thalamus. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.3. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
Olfactory bulb
Orbital cortex
Lateral olfactory stria
Medial olfactory stria
Cortical amygdala
Anterior olfactory nucleus
Olfactory tract
Uncus
Diagonal band of Broca
Parahippocampal gyrus
eFig. 9.94  Cortical olfactory areas. Inferior view of cortical structures involved in processing olfactory stimuli. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.2. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1227 ===
e75
9 
Part XI: Olfactory and Limbic System  •  Limbic System
Corona radiata
Extreme capsule
External capsule
Putamen
Globus pallidus
Substantia innominata
Internal capsule
Anterior
commissure
Anterior column
of fornix
Insula
eFig. 9.96  Coronal section of the brain at the level of the mammillary bodies. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 13.8. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Anterior olfactory nucleus
Orbital cortex
Visual association cortex
Primary visual cortex
Stria terminalis
Cingulate gyrus
S
VS
T
B
HC
Hy
Am
eFig. 9.97  Major outputs of the amygdala (Am). The basolateral group is represented in blue, central group in red, and medial group in green. 
The outputs take three routes: (1) stria terminalis to the septal nuclei (S) or hypothalamus (Hy); (2) ventral amygdalofugal pathway to the 
hypothalamus (Hy), thalamus (mainly dorsomedial nucleus), various areas of the ventromedial prefrontal and insular cortex, ventral striatum 
(VS), olfactory structures, and brainstem (B); and (3) directly to the hippocampus (HC) and other neocortical areas. (From Nolte J. The Human 
Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 23-21. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. Modified from Warwick R, Williams PL. Gray’s Anatomy. 35th Br ed. Philadelphia, PA: W. B. 
Saunders; 1973.)

=== PAGE 1228 ===
Neuroanatomy
e76
B
D
C
HC
Am
F
Stria terminalis
A
Ventral amygdalofugal pathway
3
H
HC
Am
M
IP
SN
CP
AC
DSCP
LV
Lamina terminalis
O
4
Stria terminalis
Stria terminalis
Terminal vein
B
GP
3
M
O
F
C
TF
P
HC
Am
Am
C
Stria terminalis
D
Ventral amygdalofugal pathway
3
3
Am
O
F
A
M
T
TF
H
GPe
GPi
AC
F
P
C
C
Terminal vein
eFig. 9.98  Location of the amygdala and related fiber bundles. A. Three-dimensional reconstruction with the planes of section shown in B, C, 
and D indicated. 3, third ventricle; 4, fourth ventricle; A, anterior thalamic nucleus; AC, anterior commissure; Am, amygdala; C, caudate 
nucleus; CP, cerebral peduncle; DSCP, decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncles; F, fornix; GP, globus pallidus; GPe, external segment of 
globus pallidus; GPi, internal segment of globus pallidus; H, tuberal hypothalamus; HC, hippocampus; IP, interpeduncular cistern; LV, lateral 
ventricle (inferior horn); M, mammillary body; MT, mammillothalamic tract; O, optic tract; P, putamen; SN, substantia nigra; TF, transverse 
fissure. (From Nolte J. The Human Brain. 7th ed., Fig. 23-20. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016. From A, prepared by Cheryl Cotman. A to D, modified 
from Nolte J, Angevine JB Jr. The Human Brain in Photographs and Diagrams. 3rd ed., St. Louis, MO: Mosby; 2007.)
progresses anterior to the amygdala. Projections to the septal 
area and hypothalamus follow the stria terminalis (eFig. 
9.98A–D). Fibers forming the ventral amygdalofugal pathway 
project to thalamic nuclei and several brainstem and 
forebrain structures (eFig. 9.98A–D).
Nucleus accumbens
The nucleus accumbens resides with the ventral forebrain 
adjacent to where the putamen and head of the caudate 
become continuous with one another (eFig. 9.99). Afferent 

=== PAGE 1229 ===
e77
9 
Part XI: Olfactory and Limbic System  •  Limbic System
Anterior limb of
internal capsule
Nucleus accumbens
Septum
Septum pellucidum
Caudate nucleus
Putamen
eFig. 9.99  Cerebral hemisphere viewed in a coronal section. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 13.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Medullary stria
DMN
Fornix
Habenular
nucleus
Amygdala
Ventral amygdalofugal pathway
Interpeduncular 
nucleus
Fasciculus 
retroflexus
Nucleus accumbens
Septal area
Orbital cortex
eFig. 9.100  Septal area connections. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s 
Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.23. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 
2016.)
axons to the nucleus accumbens come from the amygdala 
through the amygdalofugal pathway, hippocampal formation 
by way of the fornix, basal forebrain area from the stria 
terminalis, and ventral tegmentum through the medial 
forebrain bundle (eFig. 9.98A–D). Efferent axons leaving 
the nucleus accumbens project directly to the hypothalamus 
and globus pallidus and reach nuclei in the brainstem 
through the medial forebrain bundle. Its connections to the 
globus pallidus represent an important connection of the 
limbic system to the motor system. The overall function of 
the nucleus accumbens is recognized as a gratification center 
and has been shown to play a role in behaviors related to 
addiction.
Septal nuclei
The septal region is located rostral to the anterior commis­
sure along the medial aspect of the cerebral hemispheres 
(eFig. 9.99). This region appears to play a role in pleasurable 
behaviors. Conversely, lesion studies indicate that damage to 
this area evokes behaviors of extreme displeasure or rage. 
Afferent axons to the septal area arise from the amygdala, 
hippocampus, olfactory tract, and monoaminergic nuclei 
in the brainstem (eFigs. 9.100 and 9.101). The septal 
area also connects to a collection of cholinergic neurons 
along the wall and roof of the third ventricle known as the 
habenular nuclei. Axons from the habenular nuclei project 
to the interpeduncular nucleus of the reticular formation, 
which is believed to play a role in the sleep–wake cycle 
(eFig. 9.100).
Hippocampal formation
The hippocampal formation is located in the medial ventral 
temporal lobe (eFig. 9.102). It consists of the hippocampus, 
dentate gyrus, and subiculum (eFig. 9.103A and B). The 
hippocampal formation plays a role in memory processes 

=== PAGE 1230 ===
Neuroanatomy
e78
Insula
Tail of caudate nucleus
Hippocampus
Subthalamic nucleus
Substantia nigra
Thalamus
Internal capsule
Third ventricle
eFig. 9.102  Cerebral hemisphere viewed in cross-section. (From Crossman A. Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 13.9. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
Septal area
Anterior commissure
Fornix
Hippocampus
1
1
2
2
eFig. 9.101  Septal connections to the hippocampus. (From Mtui E. 
Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.24. Philadelphia: 
Elsevier; 2016.)
such as episodic memory, short-term memory, working 
memory, and consolidation of memories. Input to the hip­
pocampal formation is primarily received by the entorhinal 
cortex from association cortices. Because of this, it is believed 
that the “storage” of memories is in the association and 
primary cortices, not in the medial temporal lobe. Neurons 
from the entorhinal cortex project to the hippocampal forma­
tion by two pathways: the perforant pathway and alvear 
pathway. The perforant courses directly through the hip­
pocampal sulcus to reach the dentate gyrus (eFig. 9.104B). 
As the hippocampus resembles the appearance of a ram’s 
horn, early on it was named cornu ammonis (horn of 
Ammon). Based on its cytoarchitecture, it was subdivided 
into four regions termed the cornu ammonis 1 to 4 (eFig. 
9.104A). From the dentate gyrus, axons project to CA3 of 
the hippocampus. Axons from the hippocampus leave via 
the fornix or as Shaffer collaterals to reach CA1. Axons 
from CA1 may enter the fornix or project to the subiculum. 
Finally, axons from the subiculum enter the fornix or go 
back to the entorhinal cortex.

=== PAGE 1231 ===
e79
9 
Part XI: Olfactory and Limbic System  •  Limbic System
Splenium
of corpus
callosum
Posterior horn
of lateral
ventricle
Crus
of fornix
Hippocampal
commissure
Body
of fornix
Pillar
of fornix
Septum
pellucidum
Hippocampus
Fimbria
Dentate gyrus
Thalamus (cut)
A
B
Hippocampus
Alveus
Subiculum
Lateral ventricle
Alvear path
Two-way connections
with sensory
association areas
Perforant
path
Dentate gyrus
Fimbria
Choroid plexus
Entorhinal cortex
Collateral sulcus
eFig. 9.103  Hippocampal complex. A. Superior view. B. Enlarged coronal section of the hippocampal complex. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s 
Clinical Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.5A and B. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
1
2
3
4
5
4
6
7
8
Collateral sulcus
Entorhinal cortex
Perforant path
Alvear path
Subiculum
CA1 pyramidal cell
CA3 pyramidal cell
Granule cell
Fimbria
Alveus
B
A
CA3
CA2
CA4
CA1
eFig. 9.104  A. Ammon’s horn. B. Input and output connections of the hippocampus. 1. Afferents from the sensory association cortex. 2. 
Entorhinal cortex projections in the perforant pathway to the dentate gyrus. 3. Dentate granule cell connecting to the CA3. 4. CA3 neuron 
projecting to the fimbria and CA1. 5. CA1 neuron projecting to the subiculum. 6. Subicular cell connecting to the fimbria. 7. Subicular cell 
projecting to the entorhinal cortex. 8. Entorhinal pyramidal cell connecting to the sensory association cortex. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical 
Neuroanatomy. 7th ed., Fig. 34.6. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)

=== PAGE 1232 ===
Neuroanatomy
e80
Choroid plexus
Hippocampus
Head of caudate nucleus
Anterior horn of
lateral ventricle
Thalamus
Fimbria
Inferior horn of lateral ventricle
Crus of fornix
A
B
eFig. 9.105  Hippocampus–fimbria–fornix system. Superior view of brain. The cerebral cortex, corpus callosum, and surrounding white matter 
have been removed to expose the lateral ventricle. A. Choroid plexus in the lateral ventricle. B. choroid plexus removed. (From Crossman A. 
Neuroanatomy. 5th ed., Fig. 16.15. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2015.)
A second afferent pathway from the entorhinal cortex 
to the hippocampal formation is through the alvear pathway. 
Axons in the alvear pathway project directly on to CA1 and 
CA3 of the hippocampus (eFig. 9.104B). Similar to the 
perforant pathway, axons leaving the alvear pathway primar­
ily originate from CA1 and CA3, which then project to the 
subiculum.
Efferent axons leaving the hippocampal formation primar­
ily exit from the subiculum and form the fornix (Latin for 
“arch”), a white matter structure that arches over the 
ventricular system (eFig. 9.95). The fornix begins with axons 
exiting the hippocampus to form the alveus along the 
ventricular surface of the hippocampus. As the axons come 
together medially, they form a bundle referred to as the 
fimbria of the fornix. The fornix then emerges from the hip­
pocampal formation and curves under the corpus callosum 
before coursing medially to run adjacent to the midline (eFig. 
9.105). At the anterior commissure, the fornix divides into 
a precommissural fornix and postcommissural fornix to 
reach the nucleus accumbens, septal nuclei, medial frontal 
cortex, mammillary nucleus, ventromedial nucleus of the 
hypothalamus, and anterior nucleus of the dorsal thalamus 
(eFig. 9.95).
Through this section we have described a collection of 
anatomical structures and defined their connections with 
other areas of the brain and brainstem without exploring 

=== PAGE 1233 ===
e81
9 
Part XI: Olfactory and Limbic System  •  Acknowledgments
circuit begins with fibers from the subiculum, which then 
enter the fornix to reach the mammillary nuclei. These axons 
then project through the mammillothalamic tract to the 
anterior nucleus of the thalamus. Next, the axons from the 
anterior nucleus of the thalamus project through the internal 
capsule to the cingulate gyrus. Lastly, the cingulum fibers 
from the cingulate cortex project to the parahippocampal 
gyrus and then the entorhinal cortex and hippocampal 
formation (eFig. 9.106). Papez’s description of this circuit 
is useful for reviewing the major limbic system pathways; 
however, the role of some of the structures in the pathway 
has been shown to play little or no role in the expression 
of emotion. In addition, many of the structures that do play 
a role in the expression of emotion also have a role in other 
functions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the following authors for the 
use of illustrations from their publications in this chapter: 
A. R. Crossman and D. Neary: Neuroanatomy: An Illustrated 
Colour Text, 5th edition, Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2015; Todd 
W. Vanderah and Douglas J. Gould: Nolte’s The Human Brain: 
An Introduction to Its Functional Anatomy, 7th edition, Else­
vier, Philadelphia, 2016; Estomih Mtui, Gregory Gruener, 
and Peter Dockery: Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy and 
Neuroscience, 7th edition, Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2016; and 
Duane E. Haines and Gregory A. Mihailoff: Fundamental 
Neuroscience for Basic and Clinical Applications, 5th edition, 
Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2013.
1
1
2
3
5
4
6
6
6
eFig. 9.106  The circuit of Papez. 1. Neuronal projections to the 
cingulate gyrus. 2. Projections to the entorhinal cortex. 3. Projection 
to the hippocampus. 4. Fornix. 5. Mammillothalamic tract. 6. 
Neuronal connections from anterior nucleus of the thalamus to the 
cingulate cortex. (From Mtui E. Fitzgerald’s Clinical Neuroanatomy. 
7th ed., Fig. 34.7. Philadelphia: Elsevier; 2016.)
how these individual structures are interconnected with 
one another. In the 1930s James Papez, an American 
neurologist, described a circuit that links these structures 
and cortical areas together in a way that was thought to 
be involved in the experience and expression of emotion. 
This is referred to as the Papez circuit (eFig. 9.106). The 
