=== PAGE 126 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  General Description
3
125
The thoracic cavity enclosed by the thoracic wall 
and the diaphragm is subdivided into three major 
compartments:
■	 a left and a right pleural cavity, each surrounding a 
lung, and
■	 the mediastinum.
Conceptual overview
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The thorax is an irregularly shaped cylinder with a narrow 
opening (superior thoracic aperture) superiorly and a rela­
tively large opening (inferior thoracic aperture) inferiorly 
(Fig. 3.1). The superior thoracic aperture is open, allowing 
continuity with the neck; the inferior thoracic aperture is 
closed by the diaphragm.
The musculoskeletal wall of the thorax is flexible and 
consists of segmentally arranged vertebrae, ribs, and 
muscles and the sternum.
Fig. 3.1  Thoracic wall and cavity. 
Left pleural cavity
Sternal angle
Manubrium of sternum
Xiphoid process
Inferior thoracic aperture
Superior thoracic aperture
Body of sternum
Right pleural cavity
Diaphragm
Vertebral column
Rib I
Ribs
Mediastinum

=== PAGE 127 ===
Thorax
126
Conduit
The mediastinum acts as a conduit for structures that pass 
completely through the thorax from one body region to 
another and for structures that connect organs in the 
thorax to other body regions.
The esophagus, vagus nerves, and thoracic duct pass 
through the mediastinum as they course between the 
abdomen and neck.
The phrenic nerves, which originate in the neck, also 
pass through the mediastinum to penetrate and supply the 
diaphragm.
Other structures such as the trachea, thoracic 
aorta, and superior vena cava course within the media­
stinum en route to and from major visceral organs in the 
thorax.
COMPONENT PARTS
Thoracic wall
The thoracic wall consists of skeletal elements and 
muscles (Fig. 3.1):
■	 Posteriorly, it is made up of twelve thoracic vertebrae 
and their intervening intervertebral discs;
■	 Laterally, the wall is formed by ribs (twelve on each side) 
and three layers of flat muscles, which span the inter­
costal spaces between adjacent ribs, move the ribs, and 
provide support for the intercostal spaces;
■	 Anteriorly, the wall is made up of the sternum, which 
consists of the manubrium of sternum, body of sternum, 
and xiphoid process.
The manubrium of sternum, angled posteriorly on the 
body of sternum at the manubriosternal joint, forms the 
sternal angle, which is a major surface landmark used by 
clinicians in performing physical examinations of the 
thorax.
The anterior (distal) end of each rib is composed of 
costal cartilage, which contributes to the mobility and 
elasticity of the wall.
The mediastinum is a thick, flexible soft tissue partition 
oriented longitudinally in a median sagittal position. It 
contains the heart, esophagus, trachea, major nerves, and 
major systemic blood vessels.
The pleural cavities are completely separated from each 
other by the mediastinum. Therefore abnormal events in 
one pleural cavity do not necessarily affect the other cavity. 
This also means that the mediastinum can be entered 
surgically without opening the pleural cavities.
Another important feature of the pleural cavities is that 
they extend above the level of rib I. The apex of each lung 
actually extends into the root of the neck. As a conse­
quence, abnormal events in the root of the neck can involve 
the adjacent pleura and lung, and events in the adjacent 
pleura and lung can involve the root of the neck.
FUNCTIONS
Breathing
One of the most important functions of the thorax is 
breathing. The thorax not only contains the lungs but also 
provides the machinery necessary—the diaphragm, tho­
racic wall, and ribs—for effectively moving air into and out 
of the lungs.
Up and down movements of the diaphragm and 
changes in the lateral and anterior dimensions of the 
thoracic wall, caused by movements of the ribs, alter 
the volume of the thoracic cavity and are key elements 
in breathing.
Protection of vital organs
The thorax houses and protects the heart, lungs, and great 
vessels. Because of the upward domed shape of the dia­
phragm, the thoracic wall also offers protection to some 
important abdominal viscera.
Much of the liver lies under the right dome of the dia­
phragm, and the stomach and spleen lie under the left. The 
posterior aspects of the superior poles of the kidneys lie on 
the diaphragm and are anterior to rib XII, on the right, and 
to ribs XI and XII, on the left.

=== PAGE 129 ===
Thorax
128
Fig. 3.3  Superior thoracic aperture. 
Manubrium
of sternum
Esophagus
Common carotid artery
Internal jugular vein
Rib I
Superior thoracic
aperture
Apex of right lung
Subclavian
artery
and vein
Trachea
Vertebra TI
Rib II
Trachea
Pleaural
cavity (lung)
Veins
Nerves
Arteries
Esophagus
Superior thoracic aperture
Completely surrounded by skeletal elements, the superior 
thoracic aperture consists of the body of vertebra TI 
posteriorly, the medial margin of rib I on each side, and the 
manubrium anteriorly.
The superior margin of the manubrium is in approxi­
mately the same horizontal plane as the intervertebral disc 
between vertebrae TII and TIII.
The first ribs slope inferiorly from their posterior articu­
lation with vertebra TI to their anterior attachment to 
the manubrium. Consequently, the plane of the superior 
thoracic aperture is at an oblique angle, facing somewhat 
anteriorly.
At the superior thoracic aperture, the superior aspects 
of the pleural cavities, which surround the lungs, lie on 
either side of the entrance to the mediastinum (Fig. 3.3).
Structures that pass between the upper limb and thorax 
pass over rib I and the superior part of the pleural cavity 
as they enter and leave the mediastinum. Structures that 
pass between the neck and head and the thorax pass more 
vertically through the superior thoracic aperture.
Inferior thoracic aperture
The inferior thoracic aperture is large and expandable. 
Bone, cartilage, and ligaments form its margin (Fig. 3.4A).
The inferior thoracic aperture is closed by the dia­
phragm, and structures passing between the abdomen and 
thorax pierce or pass posteriorly to the diaphragm.
Skeletal elements of the inferior thoracic aperture are:
■	 the body of vertebra TXII posteriorly,
■	 rib XII and the distal end of rib XI posterolaterally,
■	 the distal cartilaginous ends of ribs VII to X, which unite 
to form the costal margin anterolaterally, and
■	 the xiphoid process anteriorly.
The joint between the costal margin and sternum lies 
roughly in the same horizontal plane as the intervertebral 
disc between vertebrae TIX and TX. In other words, the 
posterior margin of the inferior thoracic aperture is inferior 
to the anterior margin.
When viewed anteriorly, the inferior thoracic aperture 
is tilted superiorly.

=== PAGE 130 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
3
129
Fig. 3.4  A. Inferior thoracic aperture. B. Diaphragm. 
Rib XI
Distal cartilaginous
ends of ribs VII to X;
costal margins
Central
tendon
Left dome
Right dome
Aortic
hiatus
Esophageal
hiatus
Inferior thoracic
aperture
Xiphoid process
Rib XII
Vertebra TXII
A
B
Diaphragm
The musculotendinous diaphragm seals the inferior tho­
racic aperture (Fig. 3.4B).
Generally, muscle fibers of the diaphragm arise radially, 
from the margins of the inferior thoracic aperture, and 
converge into a large central tendon.
Because of the oblique angle of the inferior thoracic 
aperture, the posterior attachment of the diaphragm is 
inferior to the anterior attachment.
The diaphragm is not flat; rather, it “balloons” superi­
orly, on both the right and left sides, to form domes. The 
right dome is higher than the left, reaching as far as rib V.
As the diaphragm contracts, the height of the domes 
decreases and the volume of the thorax increases.
The esophagus and inferior vena cava penetrate the 
diaphragm; the aorta passes posterior to the diaphragm.

=== PAGE 131 ===
Thorax
130
Each pleural cavity is completely lined by a mesothelial 
membrane called the pleura.
During development, the lungs grow out of the media­
stinum, becoming surrounded by the pleural cavities. As a 
result, the outer surface of each organ is covered by pleura.
Each lung remains attached to the mediastinum by a 
root formed by the airway, pulmonary blood vessels, lym­
phatic tissues, and nerves.
The pleura lining the walls of the cavity is the parietal 
pleura, whereas that reflected from the mediastinum at the 
roots and onto the surfaces of the lungs is the visceral 
pleura. Only a potential space normally exists between the 
visceral pleura covering lung and the parietal pleura lining 
the wall of the thoracic cavity.
The lung does not completely fill the potential space of 
the pleural cavity, resulting in recesses, which do not 
contain lung and are important for accommodating 
changes in lung volume during breathing. The costodia­
phragmatic recess, which is the largest and clinically most 
important recess, lies inferiorly between the thoracic wall 
and diaphragm.
Mediastinum
The mediastinum is a thick midline partition that extends 
from the sternum anteriorly to the thoracic vertebrae 
posteriorly, and from the superior thoracic aperture to the 
inferior thoracic aperture.
A horizontal plane passing through the sternal angle 
and the intervertebral disc between vertebrae TIV and TV 
separates the mediastinum into superior and inferior parts 
(Fig. 3.5). The inferior part is further subdivided by the 
pericardium, which encloses the pericardial cavity sur­
rounding the heart. The pericardium and heart constitute 
the middle mediastinum.
The anterior mediastinum lies between the sternum and 
the pericardium; the posterior mediastinum lies between 
the pericardium and thoracic vertebrae.
Pleural cavities
The two pleural cavities are situated on either side of the 
mediastinum (Fig. 3.6).
Fig. 3.5  Subdivisions of the mediastinum. 
Rib I
Posterior mediastinum
Middle mediastinum
Sternal angle
Diaphragm
Superior mediastinum
Inferior mediastinum
Anterior mediastinum
I
IV
V
XII
X

=== PAGE 132 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
3
131
Fig. 3.6  Pleural cavities. 
Trachea
Left pleural cavity
surrounding left lung
Apex of right lung
Mediastinum
Right main bronchus
Right pleural cavity
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Diaphragm

=== PAGE 133 ===
Thorax
132
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGIONS
Neck
The superior thoracic aperture opens directly into the root 
of the neck (Fig. 3.7).
The superior aspect of each pleural cavity extends 
approximately 2 to 3 cm above rib I and the costal cartilage 
into the neck. Between these pleural extensions, major 
visceral structures pass between the neck and superior 
mediastinum. In the midline, the trachea lies immediately 
anterior to the esophagus. Major blood vessels and nerves 
pass in and out of the thorax at the superior thoracic 
aperture anteriorly and laterally to these structures.
Upper limb
An axillary inlet, or gateway to the upper limb, lies on 
each side of the superior thoracic aperture. These two axil­
lary inlets and the superior thoracic aperture communicate 
superiorly with the root of the neck (Fig. 3.7).
Each axillary inlet is formed by:
■	 the superior margin of the scapula posteriorly,
■	 the clavicle anteriorly, and
■	 the lateral margin of rib I medially.
The apex of each triangular inlet is directed laterally 
and is formed by the medial margin of the coracoid process, 
Fig. 3.7  Superior thoracic aperture and axillary inlet. 
Scapula
Axillary inlet
Superior thoracic aperture
Brachial plexus
Subclavian
artery and vein
Rib I
Clavicle
Coracoid
process
Esophagus
Trachea
Fig. 3.8  Major structures passing between abdomen and thorax. 
Aortic hiatus
(vertebral level TXII)
Caval opening
(vertebral level TVIII)
Esophagus
Aorta
Inferior vena cava
Esophageal hiatus
(vertebral level TX)
LI
Central tendon
of diaphragm
which extends anteriorly from the superior margin of the 
scapula.
The base of the axillary inlet’s triangular opening is the 
lateral margin of rib I.
Large blood vessels passing between the axillary inlet 
and superior thoracic aperture do so by passing over rib I.
Proximal parts of the brachial plexus also pass 
between the neck and upper limb by passing through the 
axillary inlet.
Abdomen
The diaphragm separates the thorax from the abdomen. 
Structures that pass between the thorax and abdomen 
either penetrate the diaphragm or pass posteriorly to it 
(Fig. 3.8):
■	 The inferior vena cava pierces the central tendon of  
the diaphragm to enter the right side of the media­
stinum near vertebral level TVIII.
■	 The esophagus penetrates the muscular part of the 
diaphragm to leave the mediastinum and enter the 
abdomen just to the left of the midline at vertebral 
level TX.

=== PAGE 134 ===
3
133
Conceptual Overview  •  Relationship to Other Regions
sternum to supply anterior aspects of the thoracic wall. 
Those branches associated mainly with the second to 
fourth intercostal spaces also supply the anteromedial 
parts of each breast.
■	 Lymphatic vessels from the medial part of the breast 
accompany the perforating arteries and drain into 
the parasternal nodes on the deep surface of the thoracic 
wall.
■	 Vessels and lymphatics associated with lateral parts of 
the breast emerge from or drain into the axillary region 
of the upper limb.
■	 Lateral and anterior branches of the fourth to sixth 
intercostal nerves carry general sensation from the skin 
of the breast.
■	 The aorta passes posteriorly to the diaphragm at the 
midline at vertebral level TXII.
■	 Numerous other structures that pass between the 
thorax and abdomen pass through or posterior to the 
diaphragm.
Breast
The breasts, consisting of mammary glands, superficial 
fascia, and overlying skin, are in the pectoral region on 
each side of the anterior thoracic wall (Fig. 3.9).
Vessels, lymphatics, and nerves associated with the 
breast are as follows:
■	 Branches from the internal thoracic arteries and veins 
perforate the anterior chest wall on each side of the 
Fig. 3.9  Right breast. 
Fourth thoracic
intercostal nerve
Mammary glands
Lactiferous
ducts
Lactiferous
sinuses
Pectoralis major
Deep (pectoral) fascia
Axillary process
Axillary
lymph nodes
Second, third, and fourth anterior
perforating branches of internal
thoracic artery
Internal
thoracic artery
Parasternal
lymph nodes
Lymphatic vessel

=== PAGE 138 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
3
137
The anterosuperior region of the trunk receives 
branches from the anterior ramus of C4 via supraclavicu­
lar branches of the cervical plexus.
The highest thoracic dermatome on the anterior 
chest wall is T2, which also extends into the upper limb. 
In the midline, skin over the xiphoid process is innervated 
by T6.
Dermatomes of T7 to T12 follow the contour of the ribs 
onto the anterior abdominal wall (Fig. 3.12C).
skin. The position of these nerves and vessels relative to the 
ribs must be considered when passing objects, such as 
chest tubes, through the thoracic wall.
Dermatomes of the thorax generally reflect the segmen­
tal organization of the thoracic spinal nerves (Fig. 3.12B). 
The exception occurs, anteriorly and superiorly, with the 
first thoracic dermatome, which is located mostly in the 
upper limb, and not on the trunk.
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
T2
T1
Supraclavicular nerves
Costal margin
Umbilicus
Anterior superior iliac spine
Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercles
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
Xiphoid process
B
C
B. Anterior view of thoracic dermatomes associated with thoracic spinal nerves. C. Lateral view of dermatomes associated 
with thoracic spinal nerves. 
Fig. 3.12, cont’d

=== PAGE 139 ===
Thorax
138
Fig. 3.13  Sympathetic trunks. 
T1
Paravertebral
sympathetic trunk
Spinal cord
Spinal cord
Sympathetic trunk
Thoracic sympathetic
ganglion
Gray ramus
communicans
White ramus
communicans
Spinal nerve
Spinal nerve
L2
Sympathetic system
All preganglionic nerve fibers of the sympathetic system 
are carried out of the spinal cord in spinal nerves T1 to L2 
(Fig. 3.13). This means that sympathetic fibers found 
anywhere in the body ultimately emerge from the spinal 
cord as components of these spinal nerves. Preganglionic 
sympathetic fibers destined for the head are carried out of 
the spinal cord in spinal nerve T1.
Fig. 3.14  Flexible thoracic wall and inferior thoracic aperture. 
Sternum moves forward
in inspiration because of
rib elevation
Elevation of lateral aspect
of ribs in inspiration
Diaphragm descends to
increase thoracic capacity
in inspiration
Flexible wall and inferior thoracic aperture
The thoracic wall is expandable because most ribs articu­
late with other components of the wall by true joints that 
allow movement, and because of the shape and orientation 
of the ribs (Fig. 3.14).
A rib’s posterior attachment is superior to its anterior 
attachment. Therefore, when a rib is elevated, it moves the 
anterior thoracic wall forward relative to the posterior wall, 
which is fixed. In addition, the middle part of each rib is 
inferior to its two ends, so that when this region of the rib 
is elevated, it expands the thoracic wall laterally. Finally, 
because the diaphragm is muscular, it changes the volume 
of the thorax in the vertical direction.
Changes in the anterior, lateral, and vertical dimensions 
of the thoracic cavity are important for breathing.

=== PAGE 140 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
3
139
Fig. 3.15  Innervation of the diaphragm. 
Left phrenic nerve
Right phrenic nerve
C5
C4
C3
Pericardium
Pericardial branch
of phrenic nerve
Diaphragm
Innervation of the diaphragm
The diaphragm is innervated by two phrenic nerves that 
originate, one on each side, as branches of the cervical 
plexus in the neck (Fig. 3.15). They arise from the anterior 
rami of cervical nerves C3, C4, and C5, with the major 
contribution coming from C4.
The phrenic nerves pass vertically through the neck, 
the superior thoracic aperture, and the mediastinum 
to supply motor innervation to the entire diaphragm, 
including the crura (muscular extensions that attach the 
diaphragm to the upper lumbar vertebrae). In the media­
stinum, the phrenic nerves pass anteriorly to the roots of 
the lungs.
The tissues that initially give rise to the diaphragm are 
in an anterior position on the embryological disc before the 
head fold develops, which explains the cervical origin of 
the nerves that innervate the diaphragm. In other words, 
the tissue that gives rise to the diaphragm originates supe­
rior to the ultimate location of the diaphragm.
Spinal cord injuries below the level of the origin of the 
phrenic nerve do not affect movement of the diaphragm.

=== PAGE 144 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pectoral Region
3
143
Table 3.1  Muscles of the pectoral region
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Pectoralis major
Medial half of clavicle and 
anterior surface of sternum, 
first seven costal cartilages, 
aponeurosis of external 
oblique
Lateral lip of intertubercular 
sulcus of humerus
Medial and lateral 
pectoral nerves
Adduction, medial rotation, 
and flexion of the humerus at 
the shoulder joint
Subclavius
Rib I at junction between rib 
and costal cartilage
Groove on inferior surface of 
middle third of clavicle
Nerve to subclavius
Pulls clavicle medially to 
stabilize sternoclavicular joint; 
depresses tip of shoulder
Pectoralis minor
Anterior surfaces of the third, 
fourth, and fifth ribs, and deep 
fascia overlying the related 
intercostal spaces
Coracoid process of scapula
Medial pectoral nerves
Depresses tip of shoulder; 
protracts scapula
Fig. 3.17  Muscles and fascia of the pectoral region. 
Pectoralis major
Pectoralis minor
Lateral thoracic artery
Lateral pectoral nerve
Medial pectoral nerve
Subclavius
Clavipectoral fascia
Thoraco-acromial artery
Muscles of the pectoral region
Each pectoral region contains the pectoralis major, pecto­
ralis minor, and subclavius muscles (Fig. 3.17 and Table 
3.1). All originate from the anterior thoracic wall and 
insert into bones of the upper limb.
Pectoralis major
The pectoralis major muscle is the largest and most 
superficial of the pectoral region muscles. It directly under­
lies the breast and is separated from it by deep fascia and 
the loose connective tissue of the retromammary space.

=== PAGE 155 ===
Thorax
154
Table 3.2  Muscles of the thoracic wall
Muscle
Superior attachment
Inferior attachment
Innervation
Function
External intercostal
Inferior margin of rib above
Superior margin of rib below
Intercostal nerves; 
T1–T11
Most active during 
inspiration; supports 
intercostal space; moves 
ribs superiorly
Internal intercostal
Lateral edge of costal groove 
of rib above
Superior margin of rib below 
deep to the attachment of the 
related external intercostal
Intercostal nerves; 
T1–T11
Most active during 
expiration; supports 
intercostal space; moves 
ribs inferiorly
Innermost intercostal
Medial edge of costal groove 
of rib above
Internal aspect of superior 
margin of rib below
Intercostal nerves; 
T1–T11
Acts with internal 
intercostal muscles
Subcostales
Internal surface (near angle) of 
lower ribs
Internal surface of second or 
third rib below
Related intercostal 
nerves
May depress ribs
Transversus thoracis
Inferior margins and internal 
surfaces of costal cartilages of 
second to sixth ribs
Inferior aspect of deep surface 
of body of sternum, xiphoid 
process, and costal cartilages 
of ribs IV–VII
Related intercostal 
nerves
Depresses costal 
cartilages
Fig. 3.27  Intercostal muscles. 
Intercostal vein
Intercostal artery
Intercostal nerve
Collateral branches
Internal intercostal muscle
External intercostal muscle
External intercostal muscle
External intercostal membrane
Innermost intercostal muscle

=== PAGE 156 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thoracic Wall
3
155
muscles and extend from the angle of the ribs to more 
medial positions on the ribs below.
Transversus thoracis muscles
The transversus thoracis muscles are found on the 
deep surface of the anterior thoracic wall (Fig. 3.28B) and 
in the same plane as the innermost intercostals.
The intercostal muscles are innervated by the related 
intercostal nerves. As a group, the intercostal muscles 
provide structural support for the intercostal spaces during 
breathing. They can also move the ribs.
External intercostal muscles
The eleven pairs of external intercostal muscles extend 
from the inferior margins (lateral edges of costal grooves) 
of the ribs above to the superior margins of the ribs below. 
When the thoracic wall is viewed from a lateral position, 
the muscle fibers pass obliquely anteroinferiorly (Fig. 3.27). 
The muscles extend around the thoracic wall from the 
regions of the tubercles of the ribs to the costal cartilages, 
where each layer continues as a thin connective tissue 
aponeurosis termed the external intercostal mem­
brane. The external intercostal muscles are most active in 
inspiration.
Internal intercostal muscles
The eleven pairs of internal intercostal muscles pass 
between the most inferior lateral edge of the costal grooves 
of the ribs above, to the superior margins of the ribs below. 
They extend from parasternal regions, where the muscles 
course between adjacent costal cartilages, to the angle of 
the ribs posteriorly (Fig. 3.27). This layer continues medi­
ally toward the vertebral column, in each intercostal space, 
as the internal intercostal membrane. The muscle 
fibers pass in the opposite direction to those of the external 
intercostal muscles. When the thoracic wall is viewed from 
a lateral position, the muscle fibers pass obliquely postero­
inferiorly. The internal intercostal muscles are most active 
during expiration.
Innermost intercostal muscles
The innermost intercostal muscles are the least distinct 
of the intercostal muscles, and the fibers have the same 
orientation as the internal intercostals (Fig. 3.27). These 
muscles are most evident in the lateral thoracic wall. They 
extend between the inner surfaces of adjacent ribs from the 
medial edge of the costal groove to the deep surface of the 
rib below. Importantly, the neurovascular bundles associ­
ated with the intercostal spaces pass around the thoracic 
wall in the costal grooves in a plane between the innermost 
and internal intercostal muscles.
Subcostales
The subcostales are in the same plane as the innermost 
intercostals, span multiple ribs, and are more numerous in 
lower regions of the posterior thoracic wall (Fig. 3.28A). 
They extend from the internal surfaces of one rib to the 
internal surface of the second (next) or third rib below. 
Their fibers parallel the course of the internal intercostal 
Fig. 3.28  A. Subcostal muscles. B. Transversus thoracis muscles. 
Subcostal muscles
Transversus thoracis muscle
B
A

=== PAGE 157 ===
Thorax
156
(Fig. 3.29). These arteries originate from the aorta and 
internal thoracic arteries, which in turn arise from the 
subclavian arteries in the root of the neck. Together, the 
intercostal arteries form a basket-like pattern of vascular 
supply around the thoracic wall.
Posterior intercostal arteries
Posterior intercostal arteries originate from vessels 
associated with the posterior thoracic wall. The upper two 
posterior intercostal arteries on each side are derived from 
the supreme intercostal artery, which descends into 
the thorax as a branch of the costocervical trunk in the 
neck. The costocervical trunk is a posterior branch of 
the subclavian artery (Fig. 3.29).
The transversus thoracis muscles originate from the 
posterior aspect of the xiphoid process, the inferior part of 
the body of the sternum, and the adjacent costal cartilages 
of the lower true ribs. They pass superiorly and laterally to 
insert into the lower borders of the costal cartilages of ribs 
III to VI. They most likely pull these latter elements 
inferiorly.
The transversus thoracis muscles lie deep to the internal 
thoracic vessels and secure these vessels to the wall.
Arterial supply
Vessels that supply the thoracic wall consist mainly of 
posterior and anterior intercostal arteries, which pass 
around the wall between adjacent ribs in intercostal spaces 
Fig. 3.29  Arteries of the thoracic wall. 
Superior epigastric artery
Internal thoracic artery
Aorta
Anterior perforating
branches
Anterior intercostal artery
Collateral branch of posterior
intercostal artery
Supreme intercostal artery
Posterior intercostal artery
Musculophrenic artery
Subclavian artery
Costocervical trunk

=== PAGE 158 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thoracic Wall
3
157
The remaining nine pairs of posterior intercostal arter­
ies arise from the posterior surface of the thoracic aorta. 
Because the aorta is on the left side of the vertebral column, 
those posterior intercostal vessels passing to the right 
side of the thoracic wall cross the midline anterior to the 
bodies of the vertebrae and therefore are longer than the 
corresponding vessels on the left.
In addition to having numerous branches that supply 
various components of the wall, the posterior intercostal 
arteries have branches that accompany lateral cutaneous 
branches of the intercostal nerves to superficial regions.
Anterior intercostal arteries
The anterior intercostal arteries originate directly or 
indirectly as lateral branches from the internal thoracic 
arteries (Fig. 3.29).
Each internal thoracic artery arises as a major 
branch of the subclavian artery in the neck. It passes 
anteriorly over the cervical dome of the pleura and descends 
vertically through the superior thoracic aperture and 
along the deep aspect of the anterior thoracic wall. On 
each side, the internal thoracic artery lies posterior to the 
costal cartilages of the upper six ribs and about 1 cm lateral 
to the sternum. At approximately the level of the sixth 
intercostal space, it divides into two terminal branches:
■	 the superior epigastric artery, which continues 
inferiorly into the anterior abdominal wall (Fig. 3.29); 
and
■	 the musculophrenic artery, which passes along the 
costal margin, goes through the diaphragm, and ends 
near the last intercostal space.
Anterior intercostal arteries that supply the upper six 
intercostal spaces arise as lateral branches from the 
internal thoracic artery, whereas those supplying the lower 
spaces arise from the musculophrenic artery.
In each intercostal space, the anterior intercostal arter­
ies usually have two branches:
■	 One passes below the margin of the upper rib.
■	 The other passes above the margin of the lower rib and 
meets a collateral branch of the posterior intercostal 
artery.
The distributions of the anterior and posterior intercos­
tal vessels overlap and can develop anastomotic connec­
tions. The anterior intercostal arteries are generally smaller 
than the posterior vessels.
In addition to anterior intercostal arteries and a number 
of other branches, the internal thoracic arteries give rise 
to perforating branches that pass directly forward between 
the costal cartilages to supply structures external to the 
thoracic wall. These vessels travel with the anterior cutane­
ous branches of the intercostal nerves.
Venous drainage
Venous drainage from the thoracic wall generally parallels 
the pattern of arterial supply (Fig. 3.30).
Centrally, the intercostal veins ultimately drain into 
the azygos system of veins or into internal thoracic 
veins, which connect with the brachiocephalic veins in 
the neck.
Often the upper posterior intercostal veins on the 
left side come together and form the left superior 
intercostal vein, which empties into the left brachioce­
phalic vein.
Similarly, the upper posterior intercostal veins on the 
right side may come together and form the right superior 
intercostal vein, which empties into the azygos vein.

=== PAGE 160 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thoracic Wall
3
159
Fig. 3.31  Major lymphatic vessels and nodes of the thoracic wall. 
Thoracic duct
Lateral aortic nodes
Intercostal nodes
Thoracic duct
Left bronchomediastinal trunk
Left jugular trunk
Left subclavian trunk
Right bronchomediastinal trunk
Brachiocephalic nodes
Right jugular trunk
Right subclavian trunk
Left parasternal
lymphatic vessel
Right parasternal
lymphatic vessel
Parasternal nodes
Diaphragmatic nodes
Diaphragm
Cisterna chyli
Lymphatic drainage
Lymphatic vessels of the thoracic wall drain mainly into 
lymph nodes associated with the internal thoracic arteries 
(parasternal nodes), with the heads and necks of ribs 
(intercostal nodes), and with the diaphragm (diaphrag­
matic nodes) (Fig. 3.31). Diaphragmatic nodes are poste­
rior to the xiphoid and at sites where the phrenic nerves 
penetrate the diaphragm. They also occur in regions where 
the diaphragm is attached to the vertebral column.
Parasternal nodes drain into bronchomediastinal 
trunks. Intercostal nodes in the upper thorax also drain 
into bronchomediastinal trunks, whereas intercostal nodes 
in the lower thorax drain into the thoracic duct.
Nodes associated with the diaphragm interconnect 
with parasternal, prevertebral, and juxta-esophageal 
nodes, brachiocephalic nodes (anterior to the brachio­
cephalic veins in the superior mediastinum), and lateral 
aortic/lumbar nodes (in the abdomen).
Superficial regions of the thoracic wall drain mainly 
into axillary lymph nodes in the axilla or parasternal 
nodes.
Innervation
Intercostal nerves
Innervation of the thoracic wall is mainly by the intercos­
tal nerves, which are the anterior rami of spinal nerves 

=== PAGE 161 ===
Thorax
160
In addition to these major branches, small collateral 
branches can be found in the intercostal space running 
along the superior border of the lower rib.
In the thorax, the intercostal nerves carry:
■	 somatic motor innervation to the muscles of the tho­
racic wall (intercostal, subcostal, and transversus tho­
racis muscles),
■	 somatic sensory innervation from the skin and parietal 
pleura, and
■	 postganglionic sympathetic fibers to the periphery.
T1 to T11 and lie in the intercostal spaces between adjacent 
ribs. The anterior ramus of spinal nerve T12 (the subcos­
tal nerve) is inferior to rib XII (Fig. 3.32).
A typical intercostal nerve passes laterally around 
the thoracic wall in an intercostal space. The largest of 
the branches is the lateral cutaneous branch, which 
pierces the lateral thoracic wall and divides into an ante­
rior branch and a posterior branch that innervate the 
overlying skin.
The intercostal nerves end as anterior cutaneous 
branches, which emerge either parasternally, between 
adjacent costal cartilages, or laterally to the midline, on the 
anterior abdominal wall, to supply the skin.
Fig. 3.32  Intercostal nerves. 
Anterior cutaneous
branch
Medial branch
Spinal cord
Lateral branch
Small collateral branch
Lateral cutaneous
branch
Posterior branch
Anterior branch
Posterior ramus
Intercostal nerve

=== PAGE 162 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thoracic Wall
3
161
Sensory innervation of the skin overlying the upper 
thoracic wall is supplied by cutaneous branches (supracla­
vicular nerves), which descend from the cervical plexus in 
the neck.
In addition to innervating the thoracic wall, intercostal 
nerves innervate other regions:
■	 The anterior ramus of T1 contributes to the brachial 
plexus.
In the clinic
Surgical access to the chest
A surgical access is potentially more challenging in the chest 
given the rigid nature of the thoracic cage. Moreover, access 
is also dependent upon the organ that is operated upon and 
its relationships to subdiaphragmatic structures and 
structures in the neck.
The most common approaches are a median sternotomy 
and a lateral thoracotomy.
A median sternotomy involves making a vertical incision 
in the sternum from just below the sternal notch to the distal 
end of the xiphoid process. Care must be taken not to cause 
injury to the vessels, in particular to the brachiocephalic 
veins. Bleeding from the branches of the internal thoracic 
artery can occur and needs to be controlled. Opening the 
sternum causes traction on the upper ribs and may lead to 
rib fractures. Sometimes partial sternotomy is performed 
with the incision involving only the upper part of the 
sternum and ending at the level of manubriosternal junction 
or just below. A median sternotomy allows access to the 
heart, including coronary arteries and valves, pericardium, 
great vessels, anterior mediastinum, and thymus, as well as 
to the lower trachea. It can also be used for removal of 
retrosternal goiter or during esophagectomy. The incision 
can be extended laterally into the supraclavicular region, 
giving access to the subclavian and carotid arteries.
A lateral thoracotomy gives access to the ipsilateral 
hemithorax and its contents including the lung, 
mediastinum, esophagus, and heart (left lateral thoracotomy) 
(Fig. 3.33).
However, it involves division of muscles of the thoracic 
wall which leads to significant postoperative pain that needs 
to be well controlled to avoid restricted lung function. The 
Intrathoracic drain
Neo-esophagus
Air in soft tissues
postthoracotomy
Ascending aorta
Pulmonary artery
Left lung
Descending 
thoracic aorta
Right lung
Fig. 3.33  Right thoracotomy for esophageal cancer with intrathoracic large-bore drain. In this case, a neo-esophagus has been fashioned 
from the stomach. 
■	 The lateral cutaneous branch of the second intercostal 
nerve (the intercostobrachial nerve) contributes to 
cutaneous innervation of the medial surface of the 
upper arm.
■	 The lower intercostal nerves supply the muscles, skin, 
and peritoneum of the abdominal wall.
(continues)

=== PAGE 164 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Diaphragm
3
163
From these peripheral attachments, muscle fibers con­
verge to join the central tendon. The pericardium is 
attached to the middle part of the central tendon.
In the median sagittal plane, the diaphragm slopes 
inferiorly from its anterior attachment to the xiphoid, 
approximately at vertebral level TVIII/IX, to its posterior 
attachment to the median arcuate ligament, crossing 
anteriorly to the aorta at approximately vertebral level 
TXII.
Structures traveling between the thorax and abdomen 
pass through the diaphragm or between the diaphragm 
and its peripheral attachments:
■	 The inferior vena cava passes through the central 
tendon at approximately vertebral level TVIII.
DIAPHRAGM
The diaphragm is a thin musculotendinous structure 
that fills the inferior thoracic aperture and separates the 
thoracic cavity from the abdominal cavity (Fig. 3.34 and 
see Chapter 4). It is attached peripherally to the:
■	 xiphoid process of the sternum,
■	 costal margin of the thoracic wall,
■	 ends of ribs XI and XII,
■	 ligaments that span across structures of the posterior 
abdominal wall, and
■	 vertebrae of the lumbar region.
Fig. 3.34  Diaphragm. 
Left pericardiacophrenic artery
Left phrenic nerve
Internal thoracic arteries
Esophageal hiatus
Aortic hiatus
Musculophrenic artery
Superior epigastric artery
Abdominal aorta
Left vagus nerve
Right pericardiacophrenic artery
Right phrenic nerve
Phrenic nerves
Inferior phrenic arteries
Right vagus nerve
Central tendon of
diaphragm
Esophagus
Inferior vena cava
Right crus

=== PAGE 165 ===
Thorax
164
■	 The esophagus passes through the muscular part of the 
diaphragm, just to the left of midline, approximately at 
vertebral level TX.
■	 The vagus nerves pass through the diaphragm with the 
esophagus.
■	 The aorta passes behind the posterior attachment of the 
diaphragm at vertebral level TXII.
■	 The thoracic duct passes behind the diaphragm with the 
aorta.
■	 The azygos and hemiazygos veins may also pass 
through the aortic hiatus or through the crura of the 
diaphragm.
Other structures outside the posterior attachments of 
the diaphragm lateral to the aortic hiatus include the 
sympathetic trunks. The greater, lesser, and least splanch­
nic nerves penetrate the crura.
Arterial supply
The arterial supply to the diaphragm is from vessels that 
arise superiorly and inferiorly to it (see Fig. 3.34). From 
above, pericardiacophrenic and musculophrenic arteries 
supply the diaphragm. These vessels are branches of the 
internal thoracic arteries. Superior phrenic arteries, 
which arise directly from lower parts of the thoracic 
aorta, and small branches from intercostal arteries con­
tribute to the supply. The largest arteries supplying the 
diaphragm arise from below it. These arteries are the 
inferior phrenic arteries, which branch directly from 
the abdominal aorta.
Venous drainage
Venous drainage of the diaphragm is by veins that gener­
ally parallel the arteries. The veins drain into:
■	 the brachiocephalic veins in the neck,
■	 the azygos system of  veins, or
■	 abdominal veins (left suprarenal vein and inferior vena 
cava).
Innervation
The diaphragm is innervated by the phrenic nerves (C3, 
C4, and C5), which penetrate the diaphragm and innervate 
it from its abdominal surface.
Contraction of the domes of the diaphragm flattens 
the diaphragm, thereby increasing thoracic volume. 
Movements of the diaphragm are essential for normal 
breathing.
MOVEMENTS OF THE THORACIC WALL 
AND DIAPHRAGM DURING BREATHING
One of the principal functions of the thoracic wall and the 
diaphragm is to alter the volume of the thorax and thereby 
move air in and out of the lungs.
During breathing, the dimensions of the thorax change 
in the vertical, lateral, and anteroposterior directions. 
Elevation and depression of the diaphragm significantly 
alter the vertical dimensions of the thorax. Depression 
results when the muscle fibers of the diaphragm contract. 
Elevation occurs when the diaphragm relaxes.
Changes in the anteroposterior and lateral dimensions 
result from elevation and depression of the ribs (Fig. 3.35). 
The posterior ends of the ribs articulate with the vertebral 
column, whereas the anterior ends of most ribs articulate 
with the sternum or adjacent ribs.
Because the anterior ends of the ribs are inferior to the 
posterior ends, when the ribs are elevated, they move the 
sternum upward and forward. Also, the angle between 
the body of the sternum and the manubrium may become 
slightly less acute. When the ribs are depressed, the sternum 
moves downward and backward. This “pump handle” 
movement changes the dimensions of the thorax in the 
anteroposterior direction (Fig. 3.35A).
As well as the anterior ends of the ribs being lower than 
the posterior ends, the middles of the shafts tend to be 
lower than the two ends. When the shafts are elevated, the 
middles of the shafts move laterally. This “bucket handle” 
movement increases the lateral dimensions of the thorax 
(Fig. 3.35B).
Any muscles attaching to the ribs can potentially move 
one rib relative to another and therefore act as accessory 
respiratory muscles. Muscles in the neck and the abdomen 
can fix or alter the positions of upper and lower ribs.

=== PAGE 166 ===
3
165
Regional Anatomy  •  Movements of the Thoracic Wall and Diaphragm During Breathing
Fig. 3.35  Movement of thoracic wall during breathing. A. Pump 
handle movement of ribs and sternum. B. Bucket handle 
movement of ribs. 
Bucket
handle
movement
Elevation of lateral
shaft of rib
Superior and anterior
movement of sternum
B
A
Pump 
handle
In the clinic
Diaphragmatic paralysis
In cases of phrenic nerve palsy, diaphragmatic paralysis 
ensues, which is manifested by the elevation of the 
diaphragm muscle on the affected side (Fig. 3.36). The 
most important cause of the phrenic nerve palsy that 
should never be overlooked is malignant infiltration of the 
nerve by lung cancer. Other causes include postviral 
neuropathy (in particular, related to varicella zoster virus), 
trauma, iatrogenic injury during thoracic surgery, and 
degenerative changes in the cervical spine with 
compression of the C3–C5 nerve roots.
Most patients with unilateral diaphragmatic paralysis 
are asymptomatic and require no treatment. Some may 
report shortness of breath, particularly on exertion. 
Bilateral paralysis of the diaphragm is rare but can cause 
significant respiratory distress.
Surgical plication of the diaphragm can be performed 
in cases with respiratory compromise and is often done 
laparoscopically. The surgeon creates folds in the 
paralyzed diaphragm and sutures them in place, reducing 
the mobility of the diaphragmatic muscle. There is usually 
good improvement in lung function, exercise tolerance, 
and shortness of breath after the procedure.
Fig. 3.36  Chest radiograph showing an elevated right 
hemidiaphragm in a patient with right-sided diaphragmatic 
paralysis. 
Right lung
Elevated right diaphragm
Heart Left diaphragm
Aorta
Left lung

=== PAGE 167 ===
Thorax
166
Fig. 3.38  Parietal pleura. 
Costal part
Pulmonary ligament
Mediastinal part
Pleura surrounding
structures in root of lung
Cervical pleura
Suprapleural membrane
Diaphragmatic part
■	 Pleura that reflects from the medial wall and onto the 
surface of the lung is visceral pleura (Fig. 3.37), which 
adheres to and covers the lung.
Each pleural cavity is the potential space enclosed 
between the visceral and parietal pleurae. They normally 
contain only a very thin layer of serous fluid. As a result, 
the surface of the lung, which is covered by visceral pleura, 
directly opposes and freely slides over the parietal pleura 
attached to the wall.
Parietal pleura
The names given to the parietal pleura correspond to 
the parts of the wall with which they are associated 
(Fig. 3.38):
■	 Pleura related to the ribs and intercostal spaces is termed 
the costal part.
■	 Pleura covering the diaphragm is the diaphragmatic 
part.
■	 Pleura covering the mediastinum is the mediastinal 
part.
■	 The dome-shaped layer of parietal pleura lining the 
cervical extension of the pleural cavity is cervical 
pleura (dome of  pleura or pleural cupola).
Fig. 3.37  Pleural cavities. 
Mediastinum
Rib I
Rib X
Rib VIII
Left lung
Right
lung
Parietal pleura
Visceral pleura
Pleural cavity
Diaphragm
PLEURAL CAVITIES
Two pleural cavities, one on either side of the media­
stinum, surround the lungs (Fig. 3.37):
■	 Superiorly, they extend above rib I into the root of 
the neck.
■	 Inferiorly, they extend to a level just above the costal 
margin.
■	 The medial wall of each pleural cavity is the 
mediastinum.
Pleura
Each pleural cavity is lined by a single layer of flat cells, 
mesothelium, and an associated layer of supporting con­
nective tissue; together, they form the pleura.
The pleura is divided into two major types, based on 
location:
■	 Pleura associated with the walls of a pleural cavity is 
parietal pleura (Fig. 3.37).

=== PAGE 168 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pleural Cavities
3
167
Fig. 3.39  Pleural reflections. 
Rib X (lateral)
Vertebra TXII (posterior)
Rib VIII (anterior)
Midclavicular line
Midaxillary line
Covering the superior surface of the cervical pleura is a 
distinct dome-like layer of fascia, the suprapleural mem­
brane (Fig. 3.38). This connective tissue membrane is 
attached laterally to the medial margin of the first rib and 
behind to the transverse process of vertebra CVII. Superi­
orly, the membrane receives muscle fibers from some of the 
deep muscles in the neck (scalene muscles) that function 
to keep the membrane taut. The suprapleural membrane 
provides apical support for the pleural cavity in the root of 
the neck.
In the region of vertebrae TV to TVII, the mediastinal 
pleura reflects off the mediastinum as a tubular, sleeve-like 
covering for structures (i.e., airway, vessels, nerves, lym­
phatics) that pass between the lung and mediastinum. This 
sleeve-like covering and the structures it contains forms 
the root of  the lung. The root joins the medial surface 
of the lung at an area referred to as the hilum of  the 
lung. Here, the mediastinal pleura is continuous with the 
visceral pleura.
The parietal pleural is innervated by somatic afferent 
fibers. The costal pleura is innervated by branches from the 
intercostal nerves, and pain would be felt in relation to the 
thoracic wall. The diaphragmatic pleura and the mediasti­
nal pleura are innervated mainly by the phrenic nerves 
(originating at spinal cord levels C3, C4, and C5). Pain from 
these areas would refer to the C3, C4, and C5 dermatomes 
(lateral neck and the supraclavicular region of the 
shoulder).
Peripheral reflections
The peripheral reflections of parietal pleura mark the 
extent of the pleural cavities (Fig. 3.39).
Superiorly, the pleural cavity can project as much as 
3 to 4 cm above the first costal cartilage but does not 
extend above the neck of rib I. This limitation is caused 
by the inferior slope of rib I to its articulation with the 
manubrium.
Anteriorly, the pleural cavities approach each other 
posterior to the upper part of the sternum. However, 
posterior to the lower part of the sternum, the parietal 
pleura does not come as close to the midline on the left 
side as it does on the right because the middle media­
stinum, containing the pericardium and heart, bulges to 
the left.
Inferiorly, the costal pleura reflects onto the diaphragm 
above the costal margin. In the midclavicular line, the 
pleural cavity extends inferiorly to approximately rib VIII. 
In the midaxillary line, it extends to rib X. From this point, 
the inferior margin courses somewhat horizontally, cross­
ing ribs XI and XII to reach vertebra TXII. From the 
midclavicular line to the vertebral column, the inferior 
boundary of the pleura can be approximated by a line that 
runs between rib VIII, rib X, and vertebra TXII.
Visceral pleura
The visceral pleura is continuous with the parietal pleura 
at the hilum of each lung, where structures enter and leave 
the organ. The visceral pleura is firmly attached to the 
surface of the lung, including both opposed surfaces of the 
fissures that divide the lungs into lobes.
Although the visceral pleura is innervated by visceral 
afferent nerves that accompany bronchial vessels, pain is 
generally not elicited from this tissue.
Pleural recesses
The lungs do not completely fill the anterior or posterior 
inferior regions of the pleural cavities (Fig. 3.40). This 
results in recesses in which two layers of parietal pleura 
become opposed. Expansion of the lungs into these spaces 
usually occurs only during forced inspiration; the recesses 
also provide potential spaces in which fluids can collect and 
from which fluids can be aspirated.

=== PAGE 169 ===
Thorax
168
During quiet respiration, the inferior margin of the lung 
crosses rib VI in the midclavicular line and rib VIII in the 
midaxillary line, and then courses somewhat horizontally 
to reach the vertebral column at vertebral level TX. Thus, 
from the midclavicular line and around the thoracic wall 
to the vertebral column, the inferior margin of the lung 
can be approximated by a line running between rib VI, rib 
VIII, and vertebra TX. The inferior margin of the pleural 
cavity at the same points is rib VIII, rib X, and vertebra 
TXII. The costodiaphragmatic recess is the region between 
the two margins.
During expiration, the inferior margin of the lung rises 
and the costodiaphragmatic recess becomes larger.
Costomediastinal recesses
Anteriorly, a costomediastinal recess occurs on each 
side where costal pleura is opposed to mediastinal pleura. 
The largest is on the left side in the region overlying the 
heart (Fig. 3.40).
Costodiaphragmatic recesses
The largest and clinically most important recesses are the 
costodiaphragmatic recesses, which occur in each 
pleural cavity between the costal pleura and diaphragmatic 
pleura (Fig. 3.40). The costodiaphragmatic recesses are the 
regions between the inferior margin of the lungs and infe­
rior margin of the pleural cavities. They are deepest after 
forced expiration and shallowest after forced inspiration.
Fig. 3.40  Parietal pleural reflections and recesses. 
Parietal
pleura
Visceral
pleura
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Rib VIII (lateral)
Vertebra TX
(posterior)
Rib VI (anterior)
Costomediastinal recess
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Midclavicular line
Midaxillary line

=== PAGE 171 ===
Thorax
170
Lungs
The two lungs are organs of respiration and lie on either 
side of the mediastinum surrounded by the right and left 
pleural cavities. Air enters and leaves the lungs via main 
bronchi, which are branches of the trachea.
The pulmonary arteries deliver deoxygenated blood 
to the lungs from the right ventricle of the heart. Oxygen­
ated blood returns to the left atrium via the pulmonary 
veins.
The right lung is normally a little larger than the left 
lung because the middle mediastinum, containing the 
heart, bulges more to the left than to the right.
Each lung has a half-cone shape, with a base, apex, two 
surfaces, and three borders (Fig. 3.43).
■	 The base sits on the diaphragm.
■	 The apex projects above rib I and into the root of 
the neck.
■	 The two surfaces—the costal surface lies immediately 
adjacent to the ribs and intercostal spaces of the 
thoracic wall. The mediastinal surface lies against 
the mediastinum anteriorly and the vertebral column 
posteriorly and contains the comma-shaped hilum 
of the lung, through which structures enter and 
leave.
■	 The three borders—the inferior border of the lung is 
sharp and separates the base from the costal surface. 
The anterior and posterior borders separate the 
costal surface from the medial surface. Unlike the ante­
rior and inferior borders, which are sharp, the posterior 
border is smooth and rounded.
The lungs lie directly adjacent to, and are indented by, 
structures contained in the overlying area. The heart and 
major vessels form bulges in the mediastinum that indent 
the medial surfaces of the lung; the ribs indent the costal 
surfaces. Pathology, such as tumors, or abnormalities in 
one structure can affect the related structure.
Root and hilum
The root of each lung is a short tubular collection of 
structures that together attach the lung to structures in the 
mediastinum (Fig. 3.44). It is covered by a sleeve of medi­
astinal pleura that reflects onto the surface of the lung as 
visceral pleura. The region outlined by this pleural reflec­
tion on the medial surface of the lung is the hilum, where 
structures enter and leave.
A thin blade-like fold of pleura projects inferiorly from 
the root of the lung and extends from the hilum to the 
mediastinum. This structure is the pulmonary ligament. 
It may stabilize the position of the inferior lobe and may 
also accommodate the down-and-up translocation of 
structures in the root during breathing.
In the mediastinum, the vagus nerves pass immediately 
posterior to the roots of the lungs, while the phrenic nerves 
pass immediately anterior to them.
Within each root and located in the hilum are:
■	 a pulmonary artery,
■	 two pulmonary veins,
■	 a main bronchus,
■	 bronchial vessels,
■	 nerves, and
■	 lymphatics.
Generally, the pulmonary artery is superior at the hilum, 
the pulmonary veins are inferior, and the bronchi are 
somewhat posterior in position.
On the right side, the lobar bronchus to the superior lobe 
branches from the main bronchus in the root, unlike on 
the left where it branches within the lung itself, and is 
superior to the pulmonary artery.
Right lung
The right lung has three lobes and two fissures (Fig. 
3.45A). Normally, the lobes are freely movable against 
each other because they are separated, almost to the hilum, 
by invaginations of visceral pleura. These invaginations 
form the fissures:
■	 The oblique fissure separates the inferior lobe 
(lower lobe) from the superior lobe and the middle 
lobe of  the right lung.
■	 The horizontal fissure separates the superior lobe 
(upper lobe) from the middle lobe.
The approximate position of the oblique fissure on a 
patient, in quiet respiration, can be marked by a curved line 
on the thoracic wall that begins roughly at the spinous 
process of the vertebra TIV level of the spine, crosses the 
fifth interspace laterally, and then follows the contour of 
rib VI anteriorly (see pp. 241–242).
The horizontal fissure follows the fourth intercostal 
space from the sternum until it meets the oblique fissure as 
it crosses rib V.
The orientations of the oblique and horizontal fissures 
determine where clinicians should listen for lung sounds 
from each lobe.
The largest surface of the superior lobe is in contact 
with the upper part of the anterolateral wall and the apex 
of this lobe projects into the root of the neck. The surface 
of the middle lobe lies mainly adjacent to the lower anterior 

=== PAGE 172 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pleural Cavities
3
171
Fig. 3.44  Roots and hila of the lungs. 
Hilum
Pulmonary artery 
(deoxygenated blood)
Pulmonary
 artery
Pulmonary veins 
(oxygenated blood)
Pulmonary
 veins
Pulmonary ligament
Root
Left lung
Right lung
Bronchus
Apex
Hilum
Posterior 
border
Anterior border
Inferior border
Mediastinal
surface
Base (diaphragmatic surface)
Costal surface
Bronchus
Pulmonary 
artery
Pulmonary 
veins
Right lung
Left lung
Fig. 3.43  Lungs. 

=== PAGE 173 ===
Thorax
172
Fig. 3.45  A. Right lung. B. Major structures related to the right lung. 
Diaphragm
Bronchus
Bronchus to 
superior lobe
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary veins
Rib I
Subclavian artery
Subclavian vein
Esophagus
Posterior
Anterior
Inferior vena cava
Azygos vein
Left brachiocephalic vein
Right brachiocephalic vein
Heart
Inferior lobe
Superior lobe
Middle lobe
Superior vena cava
Oblique fissure
Horizontal fissure
A
B

=== PAGE 174 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pleural Cavities
3
173
The medial surface of the left lung lies adjacent to a 
number of important structures in the mediastinum and 
root of the neck (Fig. 3.46B). These include the:
■	 heart,
■	 aortic arch,
■	 thoracic aorta, and
■	 esophagus.
The left subclavian artery and vein arch over and are 
related to the superior lobe of the left lung as they pass over 
the dome of the cervical pleura and into the axilla.
Bronchial tree
The trachea is a flexible tube that extends from vertebral 
level CVI in the lower neck to vertebral level TIV/V in the 
mediastinum where it bifurcates into a right and a left 
main bronchus (Fig. 3.47). The trachea is held open by 
C-shaped transverse cartilage rings embedded in its wall—
the open part of the C facing posteriorly. The lowest tracheal 
ring has a hook-shaped structure, the carina, that projects 
backward in the midline between the origins of the two 
main bronchi. The posterior wall of the trachea is com­
posed mainly of smooth muscle.
Each main bronchus enters the root of a lung and 
passes through the hilum into the lung itself. The right 
main bronchus is wider and takes a more vertical 
course through the root and hilum than the left main 
bronchus (Fig. 3.47A). Therefore, inhaled foreign bodies 
tend to lodge more frequently on the right side than on 
the left.
The main bronchus divides within the lung into lobar 
bronchi (secondary bronchi), each of which supplies a 
lobe. On the right side, the lobar bronchus to the superior 
lobe originates within the root of the lung.
The lobar bronchi further divide into segmental 
bronchi (tertiary bronchi), which supply bronchopulmo­
nary segments (Fig. 3.47B).
Within each bronchopulmonary segment, the segmen­
tal bronchi give rise to multiple generations of divisions 
and, ultimately, to bronchioles, which further subdivide 
and supply the respiratory surfaces. The walls of the 
bronchi are held open by discontinuous elongated plates of 
cartilage, but these are not present in bronchioles.
Bronchopulmonary segments
A bronchopulmonary segment is the area of lung 
supplied by a segmental bronchus and its accompanying 
pulmonary artery branch.
Tributaries of the pulmonary vein tend to pass interseg­
mentally between and around the margins of segments.
and lateral wall. The costal surface of the inferior lobe is in 
contact with the posterior and inferior walls.
When listening to lung sounds from each of the lobes, 
it is important to position the stethoscope on those areas 
of the thoracic wall related to the underlying positions of 
the lobes (see p. 243).
The medial surface of the right lung lies adjacent to a 
number of important structures in the mediastinum and 
the root of the neck (Fig. 3.45B). These include the:
■	 heart,
■	 inferior vena cava,
■	 superior vena cava,
■	 azygos vein, and
■	 esophagus.
The right subclavian artery and vein arch over and 
are related to the superior lobe of the right lung as they 
pass over the dome of the cervical pleura and into the 
axilla.
Left lung
The left lung is smaller than the right lung and has two 
lobes separated by an oblique fissure (Fig. 3.46A). The 
oblique fissure of the left lung is slightly more oblique 
than the corresponding fissure of the right lung.
During quiet respiration, the approximate position of 
the left oblique fissure can be marked by a curved line 
on the thoracic wall that begins between the spinous 
processes of vertebrae TIII and TIV, crosses the fifth inter­
space laterally, and follows the contour of rib VI anteriorly 
(see pp. 241–242).
As with the right lung, the orientation of the oblique 
fissure determines where to listen for lung sounds from 
each lobe.
The largest surface of the superior lobe is in contact 
with the upper part of the anterolateral wall, and the apex 
of this lobe projects into the root of the neck. The costal 
surface of the inferior lobe is in contact with the posterior 
and inferior walls.
When listening to lung sounds from each of the lobes, 
the stethoscope should be placed on those areas of the 
thoracic wall related to the underlying positions of the 
lobes (see p. 243).
The inferior portion of the medial surface of the left 
lung, unlike the right lung, is notched because of the 
heart’s projection into the left pleural cavity from the 
middle mediastinum.
From the anterior border of the lower part of the supe­
rior lobe a tongue-like extension (the lingula of  the left 
lung) projects over the heart bulge.

=== PAGE 175 ===
Thorax
174
Fig. 3.46  A. Left lung. B. Major structures related to the left lung. 
Diaphragm
Bronchus
Pulmonary artery
Pulmonary veins
Rib I
Left subclavian artery
Esophagus
Left brachiocephalic vein
Heart
Thoracic aorta
Aortic arch
Superior lobe
Inferior lobe
Lingula
Posterior
Anterior
Oblique fissure
A
B

=== PAGE 181 ===
Thorax
180
Fig. 3.51  Lymphatic drainage of lungs. 
Thoracic duct
Thoracic duct
Left bronchomediastinal trunk
Right bronchomediastinal trunk
Tracheobronchial nodes
Brachiocephalic node
Left parasternal
lymphatic vessel
Right parasternal
lymphatic vessel
Parasternal nodes
Diaphragm
Cisterna chyli

=== PAGE 185 ===
Thorax
184
The area anterior to the pericardial sac and posterior to 
the body of the sternum is the anterior mediastinum. The 
region posterior to the pericardial sac and the diaphragm 
and anterior to the bodies of the vertebrae is the posterior 
mediastinum. The area in the middle, which includes the 
pericardial sac and its contents, is the middle mediastinum 
(Fig. 3.57).
Anterior mediastinum
The anterior mediastinum is posterior to the body of the 
sternum and anterior to the pericardial sac (see Fig. 3.57).
■	 Its superior boundary is a transverse plane passing 
from the sternal angle to the intervertebral disc between 
vertebra TIV and TV, separating it from the superior 
mediastinum.
MEDIASTINUM
The mediastinum is a broad central partition that sepa­
rates the two laterally placed pleural cavities (Fig. 3.55). It 
extends:
■	 from the sternum to the bodies of the vertebrae, and
■	 from the superior thoracic aperture to the diaphragm 
(Fig. 3.56).
The mediastinum contains the thymus gland, the peri­
cardial sac, the heart, the trachea, and the major arteries 
and veins.
Additionally, the mediastinum serves as a passageway 
for structures such as the esophagus, thoracic duct, and 
various components of the nervous system as they traverse 
the thorax on their way to the abdomen.
For organizational purposes, the mediastinum is subdi­
vided into several smaller regions. A transverse plane 
extending from the sternal angle (the junction between the 
manubrium and the body of the sternum) to the interver­
tebral disc between vertebrae TIV and TV separates the 
mediastinum into the:
■	 superior mediastinum, and
■	 inferior mediastinum, which is further partitioned 
into the anterior, middle, and posterior media­
stinum by the pericardial sac.
Fig. 3.55  Cross-section of the thorax showing the position of the 
mediastinum. 
Mediastinum
Left pleural cavity
Right pleural cavity
Fig. 3.56  Lateral view of the mediastinum. 
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
Superior thoracic aperture
Sternal angle
Sternum
Diaphragm

=== PAGE 186 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
185
■	 Its inferior boundary is the diaphragm.
■	 Laterally, it is bordered by the mediastinal part of pari­
etal pleura on either side.
The major structure in the anterior mediastinum is 
an inferior extension of the thymus gland (Fig. 3.58). 
Also present are fat, connective tissue, lymph nodes, 
mediastinal branches of the internal thoracic vessels, 
and sternopericardial ligaments, which pass from the 
Fig. 3.57  Subdivisions of the mediastinum. 
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
VII
VIII
IX
X
XI
XII
Superior 
mediastinum
Inferior 
mediastinum
Posterior mediastinum
Anterior
mediastinum
Middle mediastinum
Sternal angle
posterior surface of the body of the sternum to the fibrous 
pericardium.
Middle mediastinum
The middle mediastinum is centrally located in the 
thoracic cavity. It contains the pericardium, heart, origins 
of the great vessels, various nerves, and smaller vessels.
Pericardium
The pericardium is a fibroserous sac surrounding the 
heart and the roots of the great vessels. It consists of two 
components, the fibrous pericardium and the serous peri­
cardium (Fig. 3.59).
The fibrous pericardium is a tough connective tissue 
outer layer that defines the boundaries of the middle 
mediastinum. The serous pericardium is thin and con­
sists of two parts:
■	 The parietal layer of serous pericardium lines the 
inner surface of the fibrous pericardium.
■	 The visceral layer (epicardium) of serous pericar­
dium adheres to the heart and forms its outer 
covering.
The parietal and visceral layers of serous pericardium 
are continuous at the roots of the great vessels. The narrow 
space created between the two layers of serous pericar­
dium, containing a small amount of fluid, is the pericar­
dial cavity. This potential space allows for the relatively 
uninhibited movement of the heart.
Fibrous pericardium
The fibrous pericardium is a cone-shaped bag with its 
base on the diaphragm and its apex continuous with the 
adventitia of the great vessels (Fig. 3.59). The base is 
attached to the central tendon of  the diaphragm and 
to a small muscular area of the diaphragm on the left side. 
Anteriorly, it is attached to the posterior surface of the 
sternum by sternopericardial ligaments. These attach­
ments help to retain the heart in its position in the thoracic 
cavity. The sac also limits cardiac distention.

=== PAGE 188 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
187
Fig. 3.60  Phrenic nerves and pericardiacophrenic vessels. 
Trachea
Left common carotid artery
Left phrenic nerve
Right phrenic nerve
Left pericardiacophrenic 
vessels
Right pericardiacophrenic 
vessels
Pericardium
Diaphragm
Superior vena cava
The phrenic nerves, which innervate the diaphragm 
and originate from spinal cord levels C3 to C5, pass through 
the fibrous pericardium and innervate the fibrous pericar­
dium as they travel from their point of origin to their final 
destination (Fig. 3.60). Their location, within the fibrous 
pericardium, is directly related to the embryological origin 
of the diaphragm and the changes that occur during 
the formation of the pericardial cavity. Similarly, the 
pericardiacophrenic vessels are also located within and 
supply the fibrous pericardium as they pass through the 
thoracic cavity.
Serous pericardium
The parietal layer of serous pericardium is continuous with 
the visceral layer of serous pericardium around the roots 

=== PAGE 189 ===
Thorax
188
arteries from veins. A hand placed under the apex of the 
heart and moved superiorly slips into the oblique sinus.
Vessels and nerves
The pericardium is supplied by branches from the internal 
thoracic, pericardiacophrenic, musculophrenic, and infe­
rior phrenic arteries, and the thoracic aorta.
Veins from the pericardium enter the azygos system of 
veins and the internal thoracic and superior phrenic veins.
Nerves supplying the pericardium arise from the 
vagus nerve [X], the sympathetic trunks, and the phrenic 
nerves.
It is important to note that the source of somatic sensa­
tion (pain) from the parietal pericardium is carried by 
somatic afferent fibers in the phrenic nerves. For this 
reason, “pain” related to a pericardial problem may be 
referred to the supraclavicular region of the shoulder or 
lateral neck area dermatomes for spinal cord segments 
C3, C4, and C5.
of the great vessels. These reflections of serous pericardium 
(Fig. 3.61) occur in two locations:
■	 one superiorly, surrounding the arteries—the aorta and 
the pulmonary trunk;
■	 the second more posteriorly, surrounding the veins—the 
superior and inferior vena cava and the pulmonary 
veins.
The zone of reflection surrounding the veins is J-shaped, 
and the cul-de-sac formed within the J, posterior to the left 
atrium, is the oblique pericardial sinus.
A passage between the two sites of reflected serous 
pericardium is the transverse pericardial sinus. This 
sinus lies posterior to the ascending aorta and the pulmo­
nary trunk, anterior to the superior vena cava, and superior 
to the left atrium.
When the pericardium is opened anteriorly during 
surgery, a finger placed in the transverse sinus separates 
Fig. 3.61  Posterior portion of pericardial sac showing reflections of serous pericardium. 
Arch of aorta
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Branch of right
pulmonary artery
Ascending aorta
Thoracic aorta
Cut edge of pericardium
Right pulmonary veins
Left pulmonary artery
Left pulmonary veins
Oblique pericardial sinus
(formed by reflection onto the
pulmonary veins of heart)
Transverse pericardial sinus
(separates arteries from veins)

=== PAGE 191 ===
Thorax
190
Fig. 3.64  Base of the heart. 
Arch of aorta
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Right pulmonary artery
Sulcus terminalis
Right pulmonary veins
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Apex
Left atrium
Left inferior pulmonary vein
Left superior pulmonary vein
Left ventricle
Coronary sinus
Left pulmonary artery
Fig. 3.63  Schematic illustration of the heart showing orientation, 
surfaces, and margins. 
Obtuse
margin
Apex
Inferior
(acute) margin
Anterior surface
Left pulmonary
 surface
Right pulmonary
surface
Base
Diaphragmatic surface
Heart
Cardiac orientation
The general shape and orientation of the heart are that of 
a pyramid that has fallen over and is resting on one of its 
sides. Placed in the thoracic cavity, the apex of this pyramid 
projects forward, downward, and to the left, whereas the 
base is opposite the apex and faces in a posterior direction 
(Fig. 3.63). The sides of the pyramid consist of:
■	 a diaphragmatic (inferior) surface on which the 
pyramid rests,
■	 an anterior (sternocostal) surface oriented anteriorly,
■	 a right pulmonary surface, and
■	 a left pulmonary surface.
Base (posterior surface) and apex
The base of  the heart is quadrilateral and directed pos­
teriorly. It consists of:
■	 the left atrium,
■	 a small portion of the right atrium, and
■	 the proximal parts of the great veins (superior and infe­
rior venae cavae and the pulmonary veins) (Fig. 3.64).

=== PAGE 193 ===
Thorax
192
Fig. 3.66  Diaphragmatic surface of the heart. 
Arch of aorta
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Right pulmonary artery
Right pulmonary veins
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Middle cardiac vein
Marginal branch of
right coronary artery
Apex
Left atrium
Left pulmonary veins
Left ventricle
Coronary sinus
Left pulmonary artery
Posterior interventricular groove
Posterior interventricular
branch of right coronary
artery
Surfaces of the heart
The anterior surface faces anteriorly and consists 
mostly of the right ventricle, with some of the right 
atrium on the right and some of the left ventricle on the 
left (Fig. 3.65).
The heart in the anatomical position rests on the dia­
phragmatic surface, which consists of the left ventricle 
and a small portion of the right ventricle separated by the 
posterior interventricular groove (Fig. 3.66). This surface 
faces inferiorly, rests on the diaphragm, is separated from 
the base of the heart by the coronary sinus, and extends 
from the base to the apex of the heart.
The left pulmonary surface faces the left lung, is 
broad and convex, and consists of the left ventricle and a 
portion of the left atrium (Fig. 3.66).
The right pulmonary surface faces the right lung, 
is broad and convex, and consists of the right atrium 
(Fig. 3.66).
Margins and borders
Some general descriptions of cardiac orientation refer to 
right, left, inferior (acute), and obtuse margins:
■	 The right and left margins are the same as the right 
and left pulmonary surfaces of the heart.
■	 The inferior margin is defined as the sharp edge 
between the anterior and diaphragmatic surfaces of the 
heart (Figs 3.63 and 3.65)—it is formed mostly by the 
right ventricle and a small portion of the left ventricle 
near the apex.

=== PAGE 194 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
193
External sulci
Internal partitions divide the heart into four chambers 
(i.e., two atria and two ventricles) and produce surface or 
external grooves referred to as sulci.
■	 The coronary sulcus circles the heart, separating the 
atria from the ventricles (Fig. 3.68). As it circles the 
heart, it contains the right coronary artery, the small 
cardiac vein, the coronary sinus, and the circumflex 
branch of the left coronary artery.
■	 The anterior and posterior interventricular sulci 
separate the two ventricles—the anterior interventricu­
lar sulcus is on the anterior surface of the heart and 
contains the anterior interventricular artery and the 
great cardiac vein, and the posterior interventricular 
sulcus is on the diaphragmatic surface of the heart and 
contains the posterior interventricular artery and the 
middle cardiac vein.
■	 The obtuse margin separates the anterior and left 
pulmonary surfaces (Fig. 3.63)—it is round and extends 
from the left auricle to the cardiac apex (Fig. 3.65), and 
is formed mostly by the left ventricle and superiorly by 
a small portion of the left auricle.
For radiological evaluations, a thorough understanding 
of the structures defining the cardiac borders is critical. 
The right border in a standard posteroanterior view con­
sists of the superior vena cava, the right atrium, and the 
inferior vena cava (Fig. 3.67A). The left border in a similar 
view consists of the arch of the aorta, the pulmonary 
trunk, left auricle, and the left ventricle. The inferior border 
in this radiological study consists of the right ventricle and 
the left ventricle at the apex. In lateral views, the right 
ventricle is seen anteriorly, and the left atrium is visualized 
posteriorly (Fig. 3.67B).
Fig. 3.67  Chest radiographs. A. Standard posteroanterior view of the chest. B. Standard lateral view of the heart. 
Right ventricle
Left atrium 
Right atrium
Arch of aorta
Inferior vena cava
A
B
Pulmonary trunk
Left auricle
Left ventricle 
Superior vena cava 
Apex of heart

=== PAGE 195 ===
Thorax
194
Fig. 3.68  Sulci of the heart. A. Anterior surface of the heart. B. Diaphragmatic surface and base of the heart. 
Right coronary artery
Right coronary artery
Coronary sulcus
Coronary sulcus
Anterior interventricular sulcus
A
B
Posterior interventricular sulcus
Anterior interventricular branch
of left coronary artery
Posterior interventricular branch
of right coronary artery
Circumflex branch of
left coronary artery
Coronary sinus
Middle cardiac vein
Great cardiac vein
Small cardiac vein
Small cardiac vein
Great cardiac vein

=== PAGE 198 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
197
trabeculae carneae (Fig. 3.71). Most of these are either 
attached to the ventricular walls throughout their length, 
forming ridges, or attached at both ends, forming bridges.
A few trabeculae carneae (papillary muscles) have 
only one end attached to the ventricular surface, while the 
other end serves as the point of attachment for tendon-like 
fibrous cords (the chordae tendineae), which connect to 
the free edges of the cusps of the tricuspid valve.
There are three papillary muscles in the right ventricle. 
Named relative to their point of origin on the ventricular 
surface, they are the anterior, posterior, and septal papil­
lary muscles:
■	 The anterior papillary muscle is the largest and most 
constant papillary muscle, and arises from the anterior 
wall of the ventricle.
■	 The posterior papillary muscle may consist of one, 
two, or three structures, with some chordae tendineae 
arising directly from the ventricular wall.
■	 The septal papillary muscle is the most inconsistent 
papillary muscle, being either small or absent, 
with chordae tendineae emerging directly from the 
septal wall.
A single specialized trabeculum, the septomarginal 
trabecula (moderator band), forms a bridge between 
the lower portion of the interventricular septum and 
the base of the anterior papillary muscle. The septomar­
ginal trabecula carries a portion of the cardiac conduction 
system, the right bundle of the atrioventricular bundle, to 
the anterior wall of the right ventricle.
Tricuspid valve
The right atrioventricular orifice is closed during ventricu­
lar contraction by the tricuspid valve (right atrioven­
tricular valve), so named because it usually consists of 
three cusps or leaflets (Fig. 3.71). The base of each cusp is 
secured to the fibrous ring that surrounds the atrioven­
tricular orifice. This fibrous ring helps to maintain the 
shape of the opening. The cusps are continuous with each 
other near their bases at sites termed commissures.
The naming of the three cusps, the anterior, septal, 
and posterior cusps, is based on their relative position in 
the right ventricle. The free margins of the cusps are 
attached to the chordae tendineae, which arise from the 
tips of the papillary muscles.
During filling of the right ventricle, the tricuspid 
valve is open, and the three cusps project into the right 
ventricle.
Without the presence of a compensating mechanism, 
when the ventricular musculature contracts, the valve 
cusps would be forced upward with the flow of blood and 
The space anterior to the crista, including the right 
auricle, is sometimes referred to as the atrium proper. 
This terminology is based on its origin from the embryonic 
primitive atrium. Its walls are covered by ridges called the 
musculi pectinati (pectinate muscles), which fan out 
from the crista like the “teeth of a comb.” These ridges 
are also found in the right auricle, which is an ear-like, 
conical, muscular pouch that externally overlaps the 
ascending aorta.
An additional structure in the right atrium is the 
opening of  the coronary sinus, which receives blood 
from most of the cardiac veins and opens medially to the 
opening of  the inferior vena cava. Associated with 
these openings are small folds of tissue derived from the 
valve of the embryonic sinus venosus (the valve of  the 
coronary sinus and the valve of  inferior vena cava, 
respectively). During development, the valve of the inferior 
vena cava helps direct incoming oxygenated blood through 
the foramen ovale and into the left atrium.
Separating the right atrium from the left atrium is the 
interatrial septum, which faces forward and to the right 
because the left atrium lies posteriorly and to the left of the 
right atrium. A depression is clearly visible in the septum 
just above the orifice of the inferior vena cava. This is the 
fossa ovalis (oval fossa), with its prominent margin, the 
limbus fossa ovalis (border of  the oval fossa).
The fossa ovalis marks the location of the embryonic 
foramen ovale, which is an important part of fetal circu­
lation. The foramen ovale allows oxygenated blood enter­
ing the right atrium through the inferior vena cava to pass 
directly to the left atrium and so bypass the lungs, which 
are nonfunctional before birth.
Finally, numerous small openings—the openings of  
the smallest cardiac veins (the foramina of  the venae 
cordis minimae)—are scattered along the walls of the 
right atrium. These are small veins that drain the myocar­
dium directly into the right atrium.
Right ventricle
In the anatomical position, the right ventricle forms most 
of the anterior surface of the heart and a portion of the 
diaphragmatic surface. The right atrium is to the right of 
the right ventricle and the right ventricle is located in front 
of and to the left of the right atrioventricular orifice. Blood 
entering the right ventricle from the right atrium therefore 
moves in a horizontal and forward direction.
The outflow tract of the right ventricle, which leads to 
the pulmonary trunk, is the conus arteriosus (infun­
dibulum). This area has smooth walls and derives from 
the embryonic bulbus cordis.
The walls of the inflow portion of the right ventricle 
have numerous muscular, irregular structures called 

=== PAGE 200 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
199
Fig. 3.72  Posterior view of the pulmonary valve. 
Semilunar cusps
Pulmonary sinus
Lunule
Nodule
Nodule
Pulmonary sinus
Left
Anterior
Right
As with the right atrium, the left atrium is derived 
embryologically from two structures.
■	 The posterior half, or inflow portion, receives the four 
pulmonary veins (Fig. 3.73). It has smooth walls and 
derives from the proximal parts of the pulmonary veins 
that are incorporated into the left atrium during 
development.
■	 The anterior half is continuous with the left auricle. It 
contains musculi pectinati and derives from the embry­
onic primitive atrium. Unlike the crista terminalis in the 
right atrium, no distinct structure separates the two 
components of the left atrium.
The interatrial septum is part of the anterior wall of the 
left atrium. The thin area or depression in the septum is 
the valve of the foramen ovale and is opposite the floor of 
the fossa ovalis in the right atrium.
During development, the valve of  the foramen ovale 
prevents blood from passing from the left atrium to the 
right atrium. This valve may not be completely fused in 
some adults, leaving a “probe patent” passage between the 
right atrium and the left atrium.
Left ventricle
The left ventricle lies anterior to the left atrium. It contrib­
utes to the anterior, diaphragmatic, and left pulmonary 
surfaces of the heart, and forms the apex.
Blood enters the ventricle through the left atrioven­
tricular orifice and flows in a forward direction to the 
apex. The chamber itself is conical, is longer than the right 
ventricle, and has the thickest layer of myocardium. The 
outflow tract (the aortic vestibule) is posterior to the 
infundibulum of the right ventricle, has smooth walls, and 
is derived from the embryonic bulbus cordis.
The trabeculae carneae in the left ventricle are fine 
and delicate in contrast to those in the right ventricle. 
The general appearance of the trabeculae with muscular 
ridges and bridges is similar to that of the right ventricle 
(Fig. 3.74).
Papillary muscles, together with chordae tendineae, are 
also observed and their structure is as described above for 
the right ventricle. Two papillary muscles, the anterior 
and posterior papillary muscles, are usually found in 
the left ventricle and are larger than those of the right 
ventricle.
In the anatomical position, the left ventricle is somewhat 
posterior to the right ventricle. The interventricular septum 
therefore forms the anterior wall and some of the wall on 
the right side of the left ventricle. The septum is described 
as having two parts:
■	 a muscular part, and
■	 a membranous part.
The muscular part is thick and forms the major part of 
the septum, whereas the membranous part is the thin, 
upper part of the septum. A third part of the septum may 
be considered an atrioventricular part because of its posi­
tion above the septal cusp of the tricuspid valve. This 
superior location places this part of the septum between 
the left ventricle and right atrium.
Mitral valve
The left atrioventricular orifice opens into the posterior 
right side of the superior part of the left ventricle. It is 
closed during ventricular contraction by the mitral valve 
(left atrioventricular valve), which is also referred to 
as the bicuspid valve because it has two cusps, the ante­
rior and posterior cusps (Fig. 3.74). The bases of the 
cusps are secured to a fibrous ring surrounding the 
opening, and the cusps are continuous with each other 
at the commissures. The coordinated action of the papil­
lary muscles and chordae tendineae is as described for the 
right ventricle.

=== PAGE 203 ===
Thorax
202
Cardiac skeleton
The cardiac skeleton is a collection of dense, fibrous con­
nective tissue in the form of four rings with interconnecting 
areas in a plane between the atria and the ventricles. The 
four rings of the cardiac skeleton surround the two atrio­
ventricular orifices, the aortic orifice and opening of the 
pulmonary trunks. They are the anulus fibrosus. The 
interconnecting areas include:
■	 the right fibrous trigone, which is a thickened area of 
connective tissue between the aortic ring and right 
atrioventricular ring; and
In the clinic
Valve disease
Valve problems consist of two basic types:
■	 incompetence (insufficiency), which results from poorly 
functioning valves; and
■	 stenosis, a narrowing of the orifice, caused by the 
valve’s inability to open fully.
Mitral valve disease is usually a mixed pattern of 
stenosis and incompetence, one of which usually 
predominates. Both stenosis and incompetence lead to a 
poorly functioning valve and subsequent heart changes, 
which include:
■	 left ventricular hypertrophy (this is appreciably less 
marked in patients with mitral stenosis);
■	 increased pulmonary venous pressure;
■	 pulmonary edema; and
■	 enlargement (dilation) and hypertrophy of the left 
atrium.
Mitral valve stenosis can be congenital or acquired; in 
the latter, the most common cause is rheumatic fever. 
Stenosis usually occurs decades after an acute episode of 
rheumatic endocarditis.
Aortic valve disease, both aortic stenosis and aortic 
regurgitation (backflow), can produce marked heart failure. 
Aortic valve stenosis is the most common type of cardiac 
valve disease and results from atherosclerosis causing 
calcification of the valve leaflets. It can also be caused by 
postinflammatory or postrheumatic conditions. These may 
lead to aortic regurgitation such as infective endocarditis, 
degenerative valve disease, rheumatic fever, or trauma.
Valve disease in the right side of the heart (affecting 
the tricuspid or pulmonary valve) is most likely caused by 
infection. Intravenous drug use, alcoholism, indwelling 
catheters, and extensive burns predispose to infection of 
the valves, particularly the tricuspid valve. The resulting 
valve dysfunction produces abnormal pressure changes in 
the right atrium and right ventricle, and these can induce 
cardiac failure.
■	 the left fibrous trigone, which is a thickened area of 
connective tissue between the aortic ring and the left 
atrioventricular ring (Fig. 3.76).
The cardiac skeleton helps maintain the integrity of the 
openings it surrounds and provides points of attachment 
for the cusps. It also separates the atrial musculature from 
the ventricular musculature. The atrial myocardium origi­
nates from the upper border of the rings, whereas the 
ventricular myocardium originates from the lower border 
of the rings.
The cardiac skeleton also serves as a dense connective 
tissue partition that electrically isolates the atria from 
the ventricles. The atrioventricular bundle, which passes 
through the anulus, is the single connection between these 
two groups of myocardium.
Coronary vasculature
Two coronary arteries arise from the aortic sinuses in the 
initial portion of the ascending aorta and supply the 
muscle and other tissues of the heart. They circle the heart 
in the coronary sulcus, with marginal and interventricular 
branches, in the interventricular sulci, converging toward 
the apex of the heart (Fig. 3.77).
The returning venous blood passes through cardiac 
veins, most of which empty into the coronary sinus. This 
large venous structure is located in the coronary sulcus on 
the posterior surface of the heart between the left atrium 
and left ventricle. The coronary sinus empties into the right 
atrium between the opening of the inferior vena cava and 
the right atrioventricular orifice.
Coronary arteries
Right coronary artery.  The right coronary artery originates 
from the right aortic sinus of the ascending aorta. It passes 
anteriorly and then descends vertically in the coronary sulcus, 
between the right atrium and right ventricle (Fig. 3.78A). On 
reaching the inferior margin of the heart, it turns posteriorly 
and continues in the sulcus onto the diaphragmatic surface 
and base of the heart. During this course, several branches 
arise from the main stem of the vessel:
■	 An early atrial branch passes in the groove between 
the right auricle and ascending aorta, and gives off 
the sinu-atrial nodal branch (Fig. 3.78A), which 
passes posteriorly around the superior vena cava to 
supply the sinu-atrial node.
■	 A right marginal branch is given off as the right coro­
nary artery approaches the inferior (acute) margin of 
the heart (Fig. 3.78A,B) and continues along this border 
toward the apex of the heart.

=== PAGE 204 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
203
arise and descend diagonally across the anterior surface 
of the left ventricle.
■	 The circumflex branch (Fig. 3.78A,C) courses toward 
the left, in the coronary sulcus and onto the base/
diaphragmatic surface of the heart, and usually ends 
before reaching the posterior interventricular sulcus. A 
large branch, the left marginal artery (Fig. 3.78A,C), 
usually arises from it and continues across the rounded 
obtuse margin of the heart.
The distribution pattern of the left coronary artery 
enables it to supply most of the left atrium and left ventricle, 
and most of the interventricular septum, including the 
atrioventricular bundle and its branches.
Variations in the distribution patterns of coronary arter­
ies.  Several major variations in the basic distribution pat­
terns of the coronary arteries occur.
■	 The distribution pattern described above for both right 
and left coronary arteries is the most common and 
consists of a right dominant coronary artery. This 
means that the posterior interventricular branch arises 
from the right coronary artery. The right coronary 
artery therefore supplies a large portion of the posterior 
wall of the left ventricle and the circumflex branch of 
the left coronary artery is relatively small.
■	 As the right coronary artery continues on the base/ 
diaphragmatic surface of the heart, it supplies a small 
branch to the atrioventricular node before giving 
off its final major branch, the posterior interventricu­
lar branch (Fig. 3.78A), which lies in the posterior 
interventricular sulcus.
The right coronary artery supplies the right atrium and 
right ventricle, the sinu-atrial and atrioventricular nodes, 
the interatrial septum, a portion of the left atrium, the 
posteroinferior one third of the interventricular septum, 
and a portion of the posterior part of the left ventricle.
Left coronary artery.  The left coronary artery originates 
from the left aortic sinus of the ascending aorta. It passes 
between the pulmonary trunk and the left auricle before 
entering the coronary sulcus. Emerging from behind the 
pulmonary trunk, the artery divides into its two terminal 
branches, the anterior interventricular and the circumflex 
(Fig. 3.78A).
■	 The anterior interventricular branch (left anterior 
descending artery—LAD) (Fig. 3.78A,C) continues 
around the left side of the pulmonary trunk and 
descends obliquely toward the apex of the heart in the 
anterior interventricular sulcus (Fig. 3.78A,C). During 
its course, one or two large diagonal branches may 
Right fibrous trigone
Left fibrous trigone
Left atrioventricular ring
Fibrous ring of pulmonary valve
Atrioventricular bundle
Right atrioventricular ring
Fibrous ring of aortic valve
Ant
Ant
Ant
Rt
Rt
Post
Post
Post
Posterior
Anterior
Left
Right
Septal
Lt
Lt
Fig. 3.76  Cardiac skeleton (atria removed). 

=== PAGE 206 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
205
Fig. 3.78  A. Anterior view of coronary arterial system. Right dominant coronary artery. B. Left anterior oblique view of right coronary artery. 
C. Right anterior oblique view of left coronary artery. 
Right marginal branch 
Posterior interventricular branch
Right coronary artery  
Left marginal branch 
Circumflex branch
Anterior interventricular branch
Right marginal branch
of right coronary artery 
Right coronary artery
Right atrium
Right ventricle
Sinu-atrial nodal branch
of right coronary artery
A
B
C
Posterior interventricular
branch of right coronary artery 
Anterior interventricular
branch of left
coronary artery 
Left coronary artery
Circumflex branch
of left coronary artery
Left marginal branch
of circumflex branch
Diagonal branch of
anterior interventricular branch
Left auricle
Left ventricle

=== PAGE 210 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
209
Cardiac veins
The coronary sinus receives four major tributaries: the 
great, middle, small, and posterior cardiac veins.
Great cardiac vein.  The great cardiac vein begins at 
the apex of the heart (Fig. 3.82A). It ascends in the anterior 
interventricular sulcus, where it is related to the anterior 
interventricular artery and is often termed the anterior 
interventricular vein. Reaching the coronary sulcus, the 
great cardiac vein turns to the left and continues onto the 
base/diaphragmatic surface of the heart. At this point, it is 
associated with the circumflex branch of the left coronary 
artery. Continuing along its path in the coronary sulcus, 
the great cardiac vein gradually enlarges to form the coro­
nary sinus, which enters the right atrium (Fig. 3.82B).
Middle cardiac vein.  The middle cardiac vein (posterior 
interventricular vein) begins near the apex of the heart 
and ascends in the posterior interventricular sulcus toward 
the coronary sinus (Fig. 3.82B). It is associated with the 
posterior interventricular branch of the right or left coro­
nary artery throughout its course.
Small cardiac vein.  The small cardiac vein begins in the 
lower anterior section of the coronary sulcus between the 
right atrium and right ventricle (Fig. 3.82A). It continues 
in this groove onto the base/diaphragmatic surface of the 
heart where it enters the coronary sinus at its atrial end. 
It is a companion of the right coronary artery throughout 
its course and may receive the right marginal vein (Fig. 
3.82A). This small vein accompanies the marginal branch 
of the right coronary artery along the acute margin of the 
heart. If the right marginal vein does not join the small 
cardiac vein, it enters the right atrium directly.
Posterior cardiac vein.  The posterior cardiac vein lies on 
the posterior surface of the left ventricle just to the left of 
the middle cardiac vein (Fig. 3.82B). It either enters the 
coronary sinus directly or joins the great cardiac vein.
Other cardiac veins.  Two additional groups of cardiac 
veins are also involved in the venous drainage of the 
heart.
■	 The anterior veins of  the right ventricle (anterior 
cardiac veins) are small veins that arise on the anterior 
surface of the right ventricle (Fig. 3.82A). They cross 
the coronary sulcus and enter the anterior wall of the 
right atrium. They drain the anterior portion of the 
right ventricle. The right marginal vein may be part
of this group if it does not enter the small cardiac 
vein.
■	 A group of smallest cardiac veins (venae cordis 
minimae or veins of  Thebesius) have also been 
described. Draining directly into the cardiac chambers, 
they are numerous in the right atrium and right ven­
tricle, are occasionally associated with the left atrium, 
and are rarely associated with the left ventricle.
Coronary lymphatics
The lymphatic vessels of the heart follow the coronary 
arteries and drain mainly into:
■	 brachiocephalic nodes, anterior to the brachiocephalic 
veins; and
■	 tracheobronchial nodes, at the inferior end of the 
trachea.
Cardiac auscultation
Auscultation of the heart reveals the normal audible cardiac 
cycle, which allows the clinician to assess heart rate, rhythm, 
and regularity. Furthermore, cardiac murmurs that have 
characteristic sounds within the phases of the cardiac cycle 
can be demonstrated (Fig. 3.81).
R
P
Q
S
T
1st
2nd
1st
SYSTOLE
SYSTOLE
DIASTOLE
Ventricular
pressure
ECG
Heart
sounds
Atrial contraction
Closure of mitral
and tricuspid valves
Closure of aortic and
pulmonary valves
"lub"
"lub"
"dub"
Fig. 3.81  Heart sounds and how they relate to valve closure, 
the electrocardiogram (ECG), and ventricular pressure. 
In the clinic

=== PAGE 215 ===
Thorax
214
Visceral afferents
Visceral afferents from the heart are also a component of 
the cardiac plexus. These fibers pass through the cardiac 
plexus and return to the central nervous system in the 
cardiac nerves from the sympathetic trunk and in the vagal 
cardiac branches.
The afferents associated with the vagal cardiac nerves 
return to the vagus nerve [X]. They sense alterations in 
blood pressure and blood chemistry and are therefore pri­
marily concerned with cardiac reflexes.
The afferents associated with the cardiac nerves from 
the sympathetic trunks return to either the cervical or the 
thoracic portions of the sympathetic trunk. If they are in 
the cervical portion of the trunk, they normally descend to 
the thoracic region, where they reenter the upper four or 
five thoracic spinal cord segments, along with the afferents 
from the thoracic region of the sympathetic trunk. Visceral 
afferents associated with the sympathetic system conduct 
pain sensation from the heart, which is detected at the 
cellular level as tissue-damaging events (i.e., cardiac 
ischemia). This pain is often “referred” to cutaneous 
regions supplied by the same spinal cord levels (see “In the 
clinic: Referred pain.” p. 46, and “Case 1,” pp. 244–246).
Pulmonary trunk
The pulmonary trunk is contained within the pericardial 
sac (Fig. 3.85), is covered by the visceral layer of serous 
Parasympathetic innervation
Stimulation of the parasympathetic system:
■	 decreases heart rate,
■	 reduces force of contraction, and
■	 constricts the coronary arteries.
The preganglionic parasympathetic fibers reach the 
heart as cardiac branches from the right and left vagus 
nerves. They enter the cardiac plexus and synapse in 
ganglia located either within the plexus or in the walls of 
the atria.
Sympathetic innervation
Stimulation of the sympathetic system:
■	 increases heart rate, and
■	 increases the force of contraction.
Sympathetic fibers reach the cardiac plexus through the 
cardiac nerves from the sympathetic trunk. Preganglionic 
sympathetic fibers from the upper four or five segments 
of the thoracic spinal cord enter and move through the 
sympathetic trunk. They synapse in cervical and upper 
thoracic sympathetic ganglia, and postganglionic fibers 
proceed as bilateral branches from the sympathetic trunk 
to the cardiac plexus.
Fig. 3.85  Major vessels within the middle mediastinum. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. 
Ascending
 aorta
Pulmonary trunk
Superior
vena cava
Superior vena cava
Inferior vena cava
Oblique pericardial sinus
Right pulmonary
artery
Right pulmonary
veins
Right atrium
Left pulmonary
veins
Left pulmonary
artery
Arch of aorta
A
B

=== PAGE 216 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
215
within the pericardial sac before entering the right atrium. 
While within the pericardial sac, it is covered by serous 
pericardium except for a small portion of its posterior 
surface (Fig. 3.85B).
A very short segment of each of the pulmonary veins is 
also within the pericardial sac. These veins, usually two 
from each lung, pass through the fibrous pericardium and 
enter the superior region of the left atrium on its posterior 
surface. In the pericardial sac, all but a portion of the 
posterior surface of these veins is covered by serous peri­
cardium. In addition, the oblique pericardial sinus is 
between the right and left pulmonary veins, within the 
pericardial sac (Fig. 3.85B).
Superior mediastinum
The superior mediastinum is posterior to the manu­
brium of the sternum and anterior to the bodies of the first 
four thoracic vertebrae (see Fig. 3.57).
■	 Its superior boundary is an oblique plane passing from 
the jugular notch upward and posteriorly to the superior 
border of vertebra TI.
■	 Inferiorly, a transverse plane passing from the sternal 
angle to the intervertebral disc between vertebra TIV/V 
separates it from the inferior mediastinum.
■	 Laterally, it is bordered by the mediastinal part of the 
parietal pleura on either side.
The superior mediastinum is continuous with the neck 
above and with the inferior mediastinum below.
The major structures found in the superior mediastinum 
(Figs. 3.86 and 3.87) include the:
■	 thymus,
■	 right and left brachiocephalic veins,
■	 left superior intercostal vein,
■	 superior vena cava,
■	 arch of the aorta with its three large branches,
■	 trachea,
■	 esophagus,
■	 phrenic nerves,
■	 vagus nerves,
■	 left recurrent laryngeal branch of the left vagus nerve,
■	 thoracic duct, and
■	 other small nerves, blood vessels, and lymphatics.
Thymus
The thymus is the most anterior component of the supe­
rior mediastinum, lying immediately posterior to the 
pericardium, and is associated with the ascending aorta in 
a common sheath. It arises from the conus arteriosus of 
the right ventricle at the opening of the pulmonary trunk 
slightly anterior to the aortic orifice and ascends, moving 
posteriorly and to the left, lying initially anterior and then 
to the left of the ascending aorta. At approximately the 
level of the intervertebral disc between vertebrae TV and 
TVI, opposite the left border of the sternum and posterior 
to the third left costal cartilage, the pulmonary trunk 
divides into:
■	 the right pulmonary artery, which passes to the right, 
posterior to the ascending aorta and the superior vena 
cava, to enter the right lung; and
■	 the left pulmonary artery, which passes inferiorly to the 
arch of the aorta and anteriorly to the descending aorta 
to enter the left lung.
Ascending aorta
The ascending aorta is contained within the pericardial 
sac and is covered by a visceral layer of serous pericardium, 
which also surrounds the pulmonary trunk in a common 
sheath (Fig. 3.85A).
The origin of the ascending aorta is the aortic orifice at 
the base of the left ventricle, which is level with the lower 
edge of the third left costal cartilage, posterior to the left 
half of the sternum. Moving superiorly, slightly forward 
and to the right, the ascending aorta continues to the level 
of the second right costal cartilage. At this point, it enters 
the superior mediastinum and is then referred to as the 
arch of  the aorta.
Immediately superior to the point where the ascending 
aorta arises from the left ventricle are three small outward 
bulges opposite the semilunar cusps of the aortic valve. 
These are the posterior, right, and left aortic sinuses. The 
right and left coronary arteries originate from the right 
and left aortic sinuses, respectively.
Other vasculature
The inferior half of the superior vena cava is located 
within the pericardial sac (Fig. 3.85B). It passes through 
the fibrous pericardium at approximately the level of 
the second costal cartilage and enters the right atrium 
at the lower level of the third costal cartilage. The 
portion within the pericardial sac is covered with serous 
pericardium except for a small area on its posterior 
surface.
After passing through the diaphragm, at approximately 
the level of vertebra TVIII, the inferior vena cava enters 
the fibrous pericardium. A short portion of this vessel is 

=== PAGE 220 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
219
Fig. 3.89  Left superior intercostal vein. 
Rib I
Left subclavian artery
Left brachiocephalic vein
Left vagus nerve
Left phrenic nerve
Esophagus
Thoracic aorta
Diaphragm
Left superior intercostal vein
Accessory hemiazygos vein
Left superior intercostal vein
The left superior intercostal vein receives the second, 
third, and sometimes the fourth posterior intercostal 
veins, usually the left bronchial veins, and sometimes the 
left pericardiacophrenic vein. It passes over the left side 
of the aortic arch, lateral to the left vagus nerve and 
medial to the left phrenic nerve, before entering the left 
brachiocephalic vein (Fig. 3.89). Inferiorly, it may connect 
with the accessory hemiazygos vein (superior hemia­
zygos vein).

=== PAGE 223 ===
Thorax
222
In the clinic
Coarctation of the aorta
Coarctation of the aorta is a congenital abnormality in which 
the aortic lumen is constricted just distal to the origin of the 
left subclavian artery. At this point, the aorta becomes 
significantly narrowed and the blood supply to the lower 
limbs and abdomen is diminished. Over time, collateral 
vessels develop around the chest wall and abdomen to 
supply the lower body. Dilated and tortuous intercostal 
vessels, which form a bypass to supply the descending 
thoracic aorta, may lead to erosions of the inferior margins 
of the ribs. This can be appreciated on chest radiographs as 
inferior rib notching and is usually seen in long standing 
cases. The coarctation also affects the heart, which has to 
pump the blood at higher pressure to maintain peripheral 
perfusion. This in turn may produce cardiac failure.
In the clinic
Aortic arch and its anomalies
The normal aortic arch courses to the left of the trachea 
and passes over the left main bronchus. A right-sided 
aortic arch occurs when the vessel courses to the right of 
the trachea and passes over the right main bronchus. A 
right-sided arch of aorta is rare and may be asymptomatic. 
It can be associated with dextrocardia (right-sided heart) 
and, in some instances, with complete situs inversus 
(left-to-right inversion of the body’s organs). It can also be 
associated with abnormal branching of the great vessels, 
particularly with an aberrant left subclavian artery.
In the clinic
Abnormal origin of great vessels
Great vessels occasionally have an abnormal origin, 
including:
■	 a common origin of the brachiocephalic trunk and the 
left common carotid artery,
■	 the left vertebral artery originating from the aortic arch, 
and
■	 the right subclavian artery originating from the distal 
portion of the aortic arch and passing behind the 
esophagus to supply the right arm—as a result, the 
great vessels form a vascular ring around the trachea 
and the esophagus, which can potentially produce 
difficulty swallowing. This configuration is one of the 
most common aortic arch abnormalities.
In the clinic
Thoracic aorta
Diffuse atherosclerosis of the thoracic aorta may occur in 
patients with vascular disease, but this rarely produces 
symptoms. There are, however, two clinical situations in 
which aortic pathology can produce life-threatening 
situations.
Trauma
The aorta has three fixed points of attachment:
■	 the aortic valve,
■	 the ligamentum arteriosum, and
■	 the point of passing behind the median arcuate ligament 
of the diaphragm to enter the abdomen.
The rest of the aorta is relatively free from attachment to 
other structures of the mediastinum. A serious deceleration 
injury (e.g., in a road traffic accident) is most likely to cause 
aortic trauma at these fixed points.
Aortic dissection
In certain conditions, such as in severe arteriovascular 
disease, the wall of the aorta can split longitudinally, creating 
a false channel, which may or may not rejoin into the true 
lumen distally (Fig. 3.91). This aortic dissection occurs 
between the intima and media anywhere along its length. If 
it occurs in the ascending aorta or arch of the aorta, blood 
flow in the coronary and cerebral arteries may be disrupted, 
resulting in myocardial infarction or stroke. In the abdomen 
the visceral vessels may be disrupted, producing ischemia to 
the gut or kidneys.
Fig. 3.91  Axial CT showing aortic dissection. 
Left lung
Aortic arch—false lumen
Aortic arch—true lumen
Trachea
Dissection flap
Right lung

=== PAGE 225 ===
Thorax
224
brachiocephalic trunk. It descends in a posterior direction 
toward the trachea (Fig. 3.94), crosses the lateral surface 
of the trachea, and passes posteriorly to the root of the 
right lung to reach the esophagus. Just before the esopha­
gus, it is crossed by the arch of the azygos vein.
As the right vagus nerve passes through the superior 
mediastinum, it gives branches to the esophagus, cardiac 
plexus, and pulmonary plexus.
Visceral afferents in the vagus nerves relay information 
to the central nervous system about normal physiological 
processes and reflex activities. They do not transmit pain 
sensation.
Right vagus nerve
The right vagus nerve enters the superior mediastinum 
and lies between the right brachiocephalic vein and the 
Fig. 3.94  Right vagus nerve passing through the superior mediastinum. 
Trachea
Right vagus nerve
Esophagus
Esophagus
Esophageal plexus
Azygos vein
Brachiocephalic trunk
Right brachiocephalic vein
Left brachiocephalic vein
Superior vena cava
Bronchus
Right phrenic nerve
Diaphragm

=== PAGE 226 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
225
Fig. 3.95  Left vagus nerve passing through the superior mediastinum. 
Rib I
Left subclavian artery
Brachiocephalic trunk
Left common carotid artery
Left pulmonary artery
Left brachiocephalic vein
Left vagus nerve
Left phrenic nerve
Left recurrent laryngeal nerve
Esophagus
Bronchus
Thoracic aorta
Diaphragm
Ligamentum arteriosum
Pericardial sac
Left vagus nerve
The left vagus nerve enters the superior mediastinum 
posterior to the left brachiocephalic vein and between the 
left common carotid and left subclavian arteries (Fig. 3.95). 
As it passes into the superior mediastinum, it lies just deep 
to the mediastinal part of the parietal pleura and crosses 
the left side of the arch of the aorta. It continues to descend 
in a posterior direction and passes posterior to the root of 
the left lung to reach the esophagus in the posterior 
mediastinum.
As the left vagus nerve passes through the superior 
mediastinum, it gives branches to the esophagus, the 
cardiac plexus, and the pulmonary plexus.
The left vagus nerve also gives rise to the left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve, which arises from it at the inferior 
margin of the arch of the aorta just lateral to the ligamen­
tum arteriosum. The left recurrent laryngeal nerve passes 
inferior to the arch of the aorta before ascending on its 
medial surface. Entering a groove between the trachea and 
esophagus, the left recurrent laryngeal nerve continues 

=== PAGE 227 ===
Thorax
226
posterior to the beginning of the right brachiocephalic vein 
(see Fig. 3.94). It continues inferiorly along the right side 
of this vein and the right side of the superior vena cava.
On entering the middle mediastinum, the right phrenic 
nerve descends along the right side of the pericardial sac, 
within the fibrous pericardium, anterior to the root of the 
right lung. The pericardiacophrenic vessels accompany it 
through most of its course in the thorax (see Fig. 3.60). It 
leaves the thorax by passing through the diaphragm with 
the inferior vena cava.
Left phrenic nerve
The left phrenic nerve enters the superior mediastinum 
in a position similar to the path taken by the right phrenic 
nerve. It lies lateral to the left vagus nerve and lateral and 
slightly posterior to the beginning of the left brachioce­
phalic vein (see Fig. 3.89), and continues to descend across 
the left lateral surface of the arch of the aorta, passing 
superficially to the left vagus nerve and the left superior 
intercostal vein.
On entering the middle mediastinum, the left phrenic 
nerve follows the left side of the pericardial sac, within the 
fibrous pericardium, anterior to the root of the left lung, 
and is accompanied by the pericardiacophrenic vessels (see 
Fig. 3.60). It leaves the thorax by piercing the diaphragm 
near the apex of the heart.
superiorly to enter the neck and terminate in the larynx 
(Fig. 3.96).
Phrenic nerves
The phrenic nerves arise in the cervical region mainly from 
the fourth, but also from the third and fifth, cervical spinal 
cord segments.
The phrenic nerves descend through the thorax to 
supply motor and sensory innervation to the diaphragm 
and its associated membranes. As they pass through the 
thorax, they provide innervation through somatic afferent 
fibers to the mediastinal pleura, fibrous pericardium, and 
parietal layer of serous pericardium.
Right phrenic nerve
The right phrenic nerve enters the superior mediastinum 
lateral to the right vagus nerve and lateral and slightly 
In the clinic
The vagus nerves, recurrent laryngeal nerves, 
and hoarseness
The left recurrent laryngeal nerve is a branch of the left 
vagus nerve. It passes between the pulmonary artery and 
the aorta, a region known clinically as the aortopulmonary 
window, and may be compressed in any patient with a 
pathological mass in this region. This compression results 
in left vocal cord paralysis and hoarseness of the voice. 
Lymph node enlargement, often associated with the 
spread of lung cancer, is a common condition that may 
produce compression. Chest radiography is therefore 
usually carried out for all patients whose symptoms 
include a hoarse voice.
More superiorly, in the root of the neck, the right 
vagus nerve gives off the right recurrent laryngeal nerve, 
which “hooks” around the right subclavian artery as it 
passes over the cervical pleura. If a patient has a hoarse 
voice and a right vocal cord palsy is demonstrated at 
laryngoscopy, chest radiography with an apical lordotic 
view should be obtained to assess for cancer in the right 
lung apex (Pancoast’s tumor).
Left recurrent 
laryngeal nerve
Left vagus nerve
Right main
bronchus
TIV/V
vertebral
level
Left main 
bronchus
Ligamentum 
arteriosum
Left 
pulmonary 
artery
Left subclavian 
artery
Pulmonary trunk
Esophagus
Esophagus
Trachea
Thoracic aorta
Arch of aorta
Fig. 3.96  Left recurrent laryngeal nerve passing through the 
superior mediastinum. 

=== PAGE 228 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
227
The esophagus has a slight anterior-to-posterior curva­
ture that parallels the thoracic portion of the vertebral 
column, and is secured superiorly by its attachment to 
the pharynx and inferiorly by its attachment to the 
diaphragm.
Relationships to important structures in 
the posterior mediastinum
In the posterior mediastinum, the esophagus is related to a 
number of important structures. The right side is covered 
by the mediastinal part of the parietal pleura.
Posterior to the esophagus, the thoracic duct is on the 
right side inferiorly, but crosses to the left more superiorly. 
Also on the left side of the esophagus is the thoracic aorta.
Anterior to the esophagus, below the level of the tra­
cheal bifurcation, are the right pulmonary artery and the 
left main bronchus. The esophagus then passes immedi­
ately posteriorly to the left atrium, separated from it only 
by pericardium. Inferior to the left atrium, the esophagus 
is related to the diaphragm.
Structures other than the thoracic duct posterior to the 
esophagus include portions of the hemiazygos veins, the 
right posterior intercostal vessels, and, near the diaphragm, 
the thoracic aorta.
The esophagus is a flexible, muscular tube that can be 
compressed or narrowed by surrounding structures at four 
locations (Fig. 3.98):
■	 the junction of the esophagus with the pharynx in 
the neck;
■	 in the superior mediastinum where the esophagus is 
crossed by the arch of the aorta;
■	 in the posterior mediastinum where the esophagus is 
compressed by the left main bronchus;
■	 in the posterior mediastinum at the esophageal hiatus 
in the diaphragm.
These constrictions have important clinical conse­
quences. For example, a swallowed object is most likely to 
lodge at a constricted area. An ingested corrosive substance 
would move more slowly through a narrowed region, 
causing more damage at this site than elsewhere along the 
esophagus. Also, constrictions present problems during 
the passage of medical instruments.
Arterial supply and venous 
and lymphatic drainage
The arterial supply and venous drainage of the esopha­
gus in the posterior mediastinum involve many vessels. 
Esophageal arteries arise from the thoracic aorta, bronchial 
arteries, and ascending branches of the left gastric artery 
in the abdomen.
Thoracic duct in the superior mediastinum
The thoracic duct, which is the major lymphatic vessel in 
the body, passes through the posterior portion of the supe­
rior mediastinum (see Figs. 3.87 and 3.92). It:
■	 enters the superior mediastinum inferiorly, slightly to 
the left of the midline, having moved to this position just 
before leaving the posterior mediastinum opposite ver­
tebral level TIV/V; and
■	 continues through the superior mediastinum, posterior 
to the arch of the aorta, and the initial portion of the 
left subclavian artery, between the esophagus and the 
left mediastinal part of the parietal pleura.
Posterior mediastinum
The posterior mediastinum is posterior to the pericardial 
sac and diaphragm and anterior to the bodies of the mid 
and lower thoracic vertebrae (see Fig. 3.57).
■	 Its superior boundary is a transverse plane passing from 
the sternal angle to the intervertebral disc between 
vertebrae TIV and TV.
■	 Its inferior boundary is the diaphragm.
■	 Laterally, it is bordered by the mediastinal part of pari­
etal pleura on either side.
■	 Superiorly, it is continuous with the superior 
mediastinum.
Major structures in the posterior mediastinum 
include the:
■	 esophagus and its associated nerve plexus,
■	 thoracic aorta and its branches,
■	 azygos system of veins,
■	 thoracic duct and associated lymph nodes,
■	 sympathetic trunks, and
■	 thoracic splanchnic nerves.
Esophagus
The esophagus is a muscular tube passing between the 
pharynx in the neck and the stomach in the abdomen. It 
begins at the inferior border of the cricoid cartilage, oppo­
site vertebra CVI, and ends at the cardiac opening of the 
stomach, opposite vertebra TXI.
The esophagus descends on the anterior aspect of the 
bodies of the vertebrae, generally in a midline position as 
it moves through the thorax (Fig. 3.97). As it approaches 
the diaphragm, it moves anteriorly and to the left, crossing 
from the right side of the thoracic aorta to eventually 
assume a position anterior to it. It then passes through the 
esophageal hiatus, an opening in the muscular part of the 
diaphragm, at vertebral level TX.

=== PAGE 229 ===
Thorax
228
Fig. 3.97  Esophagus. 
Right main bronchus
Left main bronchus
Left subclavian artery
Left common carotid artery
Esophagus
Esophagus
Trachea
Thoracic aorta
Arch of aorta
Brachiocephalic trunk
Diaphragm
Venous drainage involves small vessels returning to the 
azygos vein, hemiazygos vein, and esophageal branches to 
the left gastric vein in the abdomen.
Lymphatic drainage of the esophagus in the posterior 
mediastinum returns to posterior mediastinal and left 
gastric nodes.
Innervation
Innervation of the esophagus, in general, is complex. 
Esophageal branches arise from the vagus nerves and 
sympathetic trunks.
Striated muscle fibers in the superior portion of the 
esophagus originate from the branchial arches and are 
innervated by branchial efferents from the vagus nerves.
Smooth muscle fibers are innervated by cranial compo­
nents of the parasympathetic part of the autonomic divi­
sion of the peripheral nervous system, visceral efferents 
from the vagus nerves. These are preganglionic fibers that 
synapse in the myenteric and submucosal plexuses of the 
enteric nervous system in the esophageal wall.
Sensory innervation of the esophagus involves visceral 
afferent fibers originating in the vagus nerves, sympathetic 
trunks, and splanchnic nerves.
The visceral afferents from the vagus nerves are 
involved in relaying information back to the central 
nervous system about normal physiological processes and 
reflex activities. They are not involved in the relay of pain 
recognition.

=== PAGE 230 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
229
The visceral afferents that pass through the sympathetic 
trunks and the splanchnic nerves are the primary partici­
pants in detection of esophageal pain and transmission of 
this information to various levels of the central nervous 
system.
Esophageal plexus
After passing posteriorly to the root of the lungs, the right 
and left vagus nerves approach the esophagus. As they 
reach the esophagus, each nerve divides into several 
branches that spread over this structure, forming the 
esophageal plexus (Fig. 3.99). There is some mixing of 
fibers from the two vagus nerves as the plexus continues 
inferiorly on the esophagus toward the diaphragm. Just 
above the diaphragm, fibers of the plexus converge to form 
two trunks:
Fig. 3.98  Sites of normal esophageal constrictions. 
Esophagus
Trachea
Pharynx
Diaphragm
Junction of esophagus 
with pharynx
Where esophagus is
crossed by arch of
aorta
Where esophagus 
is compressed by 
left main bronchus
At the esophageal 
hiatus
Position of
esophagus
posterior to
left atrium
Fig. 3.99  Esophageal plexus. 
Left vagus nerve
Right vagus
 nerve
Anterior vagal trunk
Posterior vagal
 trunk
Esophageal
plexus
Esophagus
Stomach
■	 the anterior vagal trunk on the anterior surface of 
the esophagus, mainly from fibers originally in the left 
vagus nerve;
■	 the posterior vagal trunk on the posterior surface of 
the esophagus, mainly from fibers originally in the right 
vagus nerve.
The vagal trunks continue on the surface of the 
esophagus as it passes through the diaphragm into the 
abdomen.

=== PAGE 231 ===
Thorax
230
In the clinic
Esophageal rupture
The first case of esophageal rupture was described by 
Herman Boerhaave in 1724. This case was fatal, but early 
diagnosis has increased the survival rate up to 65%. If the 
disease is left untreated, mortality is 100%.
Typically, the rupture occurs in the lower third of 
the esophagus with a sudden rise in intraluminal 
esophageal pressure produced by vomiting secondary to 
an uncoordination and failure of the cricopharyngeus 
muscle to relax. Because the tears typically occur on the 
left, they are often associated with a large left pleural 
effusion that contains the gastric contents. In some 
patients, subcutaneous emphysema may be 
demonstrated.
Treatment is optimal with urgent surgical repair.
Table 3.3  Branches of the thoracic aorta
Branches
Origin and course
Pericardial branches
A few small vessels to the posterior surface of the pericardial sac
Bronchial branches
Vary in number, size, and origin—usually, two left bronchial arteries from the thoracic aorta and one right 
bronchial artery from the third posterior intercostal artery or the superior left bronchial artery
Esophageal branches
Four or five vessels from the anterior aspect of the thoracic aorta, which form a continuous anastomotic 
chain—anastomotic connections include esophageal branches of the inferior thyroid artery superiorly, and 
esophageal branches of the left inferior phrenic and the left gastric arteries inferiorly
Mediastinal branches
Several small branches supplying lymph nodes, vessels, nerves, and areolar tissue in the posterior 
mediastinum
Posterior intercostal arteries
Usually, nine pairs of vessels branching from the posterior surface of the thoracic aorta—usually supply 
lower nine intercostal spaces (first two spaces are supplied by the supreme intercostal artery—a branch of 
the costocervical trunk)
Superior phrenic arteries
Small vessels from the lower part of the thoracic aorta supplying the posterior part of the superior surface 
of the diaphragm—they anastomose with the musculophrenic and pericardiacophrenic arteries
Subcostal artery
The lowest pair of branches from the thoracic aorta located inferior to rib XII
Thoracic aorta
The thoracic portion of the descending aorta (thoracic 
aorta) begins at the lower edge of vertebra TIV, where it is 
continuous with the arch of the aorta. It ends anterior to 
the lower edge of vertebra TXII, where it passes through 
the aortic hiatus posterior to the diaphragm. Situated 
to the left of the vertebral column superiorly, it approaches 
the midline inferiorly, lying directly anterior to the lower 
thoracic vertebral bodies (Fig. 3.101). Throughout its 
course, it gives off a number of branches, which are sum­
marized in Table 3.3.
In the clinic
Esophageal cancer
When patients present with esophageal cancer, it is 
important to note which portion of the esophagus 
contains the tumor because tumor location determines 
the sites to which the disease will spread (Fig. 3.100).
Esophageal cancer spreads quickly to lymphatics, 
draining to lymph nodes in the neck and around the celiac 
artery. Endoscopy or barium swallow is used to assess the 
site. CT and MRI may be necessary to stage the disease.
Once the extent of the disease has been assessed, 
treatment can be planned.
Fig. 3.100  Axial CT showing esophageal cancer. 
Right lung
Left lung
Trachea
Esophageal cancer
Aorta

=== PAGE 232 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
231
Fig. 3.101  Thoracic aorta and branches. 
Left subclavian artery
Supreme
intercostal artery
Superior left
bronchial
artery
Right
bronchial
artery
Esophagus
Esophagus
Trachea
Arch of aorta
Posterior
intercostal
arteries
Mediastinal
branches
Esophageal 
branches
There is significant variation in the origin, course, tribu­
taries, anastomoses, and termination of these vessels.
Azygos vein
The azygos vein arises opposite vertebra LI or LII at the 
junction between the right ascending lumbar vein and 
the right subcostal vein (Fig. 3.102). It may also arise as 
a direct branch of the inferior vena cava, which is joined 
by a common trunk from the junction of the right ascend­
ing lumbar vein and the right subcostal vein.
The azygos vein enters the thorax through the aortic 
hiatus of the diaphragm, or it enters through or posterior 
to the right crus of the diaphragm. It ascends through the 
posterior mediastinum, usually to the right of the thoracic 
duct. At approximately vertebral level TIV, it arches anteri­
orly, over the root of the right lung, to join the superior 
vena cava before the superior vena cava enters the pericar­
dial sac.
Tributaries of the azygos vein include:
■	 the right superior intercostal vein (a single vessel 
formed by the junction of the second, third, and fourth 
intercostal veins),
■	 fifth to eleventh right posterior intercostal veins,
■	 the hemiazygos vein,
■	 the accessory hemiazygos vein,
■	 esophageal veins,
■	 mediastinal veins,
■	 pericardial veins, and
■	 right bronchial veins.
Hemiazygos vein
The hemiazygos vein (inferior hemiazygos vein) 
usually arises at the junction between the left ascending 
lumbar vein and the left subcostal vein (Fig. 3.102). It 
may also arise from either of these veins alone and often 
has a connection to the left renal vein.
The hemiazygos vein usually enters the thorax through 
the left crus of the diaphragm, but may enter through the 
aortic hiatus. It ascends through the posterior mediastinum, 
on the left side, to approximately vertebral level TIX. At this 
point, it crosses the vertebral column, posterior to the 
thoracic aorta, esophagus, and thoracic duct, to enter the 
azygos vein.
Tributaries joining the hemiazygos vein include:
■	 the lowest four or five left posterior intercostal veins,
■	 esophageal veins, and
■	 mediastinal veins.
Azygos system of veins
The azygos system of veins consists of a series of longitu­
dinal vessels on each side of the body that drain blood from 
the body wall and move it superiorly to empty into the 
superior vena cava. Blood from some of the thoracic viscera 
may also enter the system, and there are anastomotic con­
nections with abdominal veins.
The longitudinal vessels may or may not be continuous 
and are connected to each other from side to side at various 
points throughout their course (Fig. 3.102).
The azygos system of veins serves as an important 
anastomotic pathway capable of returning venous blood 
from the lower part of the body to the heart if the inferior 
vena cava is blocked.
The major veins in the system are:
■	 the azygos vein, on the right; and
■	 the hemiazygos vein and the accessory hemiazygos vein, 
on the left.

=== PAGE 234 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
233
Thoracic duct in the posterior mediastinum
The thoracic duct is the principal channel through which 
lymph from most of the body is returned to the venous system. 
It begins as a confluence of lymph trunks in the abdomen, 
sometimes forming a saccular dilation referred to as the 
cisterna chyli (chyle cistern), which drains the abdominal 
viscera and walls, pelvis, perineum, and lower limbs.
The thoracic duct extends from vertebra LII to the root 
of the neck.
Entering the thorax, posterior to the aorta, through the 
aortic hiatus of the diaphragm, the thoracic duct ascends 
through the posterior mediastinum to the right of midline 
between the thoracic aorta on the left and the azygos vein 
on the right (Fig. 3.103). It lies posterior to the diaphragm 
Accessory hemiazygos vein
The accessory hemiazygos vein (superior hemiazygos 
vein) descends on the left side from the superior portion of 
the posterior mediastinum to approximately vertebral level 
TVIII (Fig. 3.102). At this point, it crosses the vertebral 
column to join the azygos vein, or ends in the hemiazygos 
vein, or has a connection to both veins. Usually, it also has 
a connection superiorly to the left superior intercostal 
vein.
Vessels that drain into the accessory hemiazygos vein 
include:
■	 the fourth to eighth left posterior intercostal veins, and
■	 sometimes, the left bronchial veins.
Fig. 3.103  Thoracic duct. 
Esophagus
Thoracic duct
Thoracic duct
Left brachiocephalic vein
Accessory 
hemiazygos vein
Hemiazygos vein
Azygos vein
Cisterna chyli
Right common carotid artery
Superior vena cava

=== PAGE 235 ===
Thorax
234
and the esophagus and anterior to the bodies of the 
vertebrae.
At vertebral level TV, the thoracic duct moves to the left 
of midline and enters the superior mediastinum. It contin­
ues through the superior mediastinum and into the neck.
After being joined, in most cases, by the left jugular 
trunk, which drains the left side of the head and neck, and 
the left subclavian trunk, which drains the left upper 
limb, the thoracic duct empties into the junction of the left 
subclavian and left internal jugular veins.
The thoracic duct usually receives the contents from:
■	 the confluence of lymph trunks in the abdomen,
■	 descending thoracic lymph trunks draining the lower 
six or seven intercostal spaces on both sides,
■	 upper intercostal lymph trunks draining the upper left 
five or six intercostal spaces,
■	 ducts from posterior mediastinal nodes, and
■	 ducts from posterior diaphragmatic nodes.
Sympathetic trunks
The sympathetic trunks are an important component 
of the sympathetic part of the autonomic division of the 
peripheral nervous system and are usually considered a 
component of the posterior mediastinum as they pass 
through the thorax.
This portion of the sympathetic trunks consists of two 
parallel cords punctuated by 11 or 12 ganglia (Fig. 3.104). 
The ganglia are connected to adjacent thoracic spinal 
nerves by white and gray rami communicantes and are 
Fig. 3.104  Thoracic portion of sympathetic trunks. 
Sympathetic trunk
Sympathetic ganglion
Intercostal nerve
(anterior ramus of
thoracic spinal nerve)
Greater splanchnic 
nerve
Lesser splanchnic 
nerve
Least splanchnic 
nerve
TI
TV
Gray and white
rami communicantes

=== PAGE 236 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Mediastinum
3
235
The second type, which includes branches from the 
lower seven ganglia, consists mainly of preganglionic 
sympathetic fibers, which supply the various abdominal 
and pelvic viscera. These branches are large, also carry 
visceral afferent fibers, and form the three thoracic 
splanchnic nerves referred to as the greater, lesser, and 
least splanchnic nerves (Fig. 3.104).
■	 The greater splanchnic nerve on each side usually 
arises from the fifth to ninth or tenth thoracic ganglia. 
It descends across the vertebral bodies moving in a 
medial direction, passes into the abdomen through 
the crus of the diaphragm, and ends in the celiac 
ganglion.
■	 The lesser splanchnic nerve usually arises from the 
ninth and tenth, or tenth and eleventh thoracic ganglia. 
It descends across the vertebral bodies moving in a 
medial direction, and passes into the abdomen through 
the crus of the diaphragm to end in the aorticorenal 
ganglion.
■	 The least splanchnic nerve (lowest splanchnic 
nerve) usually arises from the twelfth thoracic ganglion. 
It descends and passes into the abdomen through the 
crus of the diaphragm to end in the renal plexus.
numbered according to the thoracic spinal nerve with 
which they are associated.
In the superior portion of the posterior mediastinum, 
the trunks are anterior to the neck of the ribs. Inferiorly, 
they become more medial in position until they lie on the 
lateral aspect of the vertebral bodies. The sympathetic 
trunks leave the thorax by passing posterior to the dia­
phragm under the medial arcuate ligament or through the 
crura of the diaphragm. Throughout their course the 
trunks are covered by parietal pleura.
Branches from the ganglia
Two types of medial branches are given off by the ganglia:
■	 The first type includes branches from the upper five 
ganglia.
■	 The second type includes branches from the lower seven 
ganglia.
The first type, which includes branches from the upper 
five ganglia, consists mainly of postganglionic sympathetic 
fibers, which supply the various thoracic viscera. These 
branches are relatively small, and also contain visceral 
afferent fibers.

=== PAGE 241 ===
Thorax
240
Superiorly, the parietal pleura projects above the first 
costal cartilage. Anteriorly, the costal pleura approaches 
the midline posterior to the upper portion of the sternum. 
Posterior to the lower portion of the sternum, the left 
parietal pleura does not come as close to the midline as it 
does on the right side. This is because the heart bulges onto 
the left side (Fig. 3.111A).
Inferiorly, the pleura reflects onto the diaphragm above 
the costal margin and courses around the thoracic wall 
following an VIII, X, XII contour (i.e., rib VIII in the mid­
clavicular line, rib X in the midaxillary line, and vertebra 
TXII posteriorly).
The lungs do not completely fill the area surrounded 
by the pleural cavities, particularly anteriorly and 
inferiorly.
■	 Costomediastinal recesses occur anteriorly, particularly 
on the left side in relationship to the heart bulge.
■	 Costodiaphragmatic recesses occur inferiorly between 
the lower lung margin and the lower margin of the 
pleural cavity.
Where to listen for heart sounds
To listen for valve sounds, position the stethoscope down­
stream from the flow of blood through the valves 
(Fig. 3.110).
■	 The tricuspid valve is heard just to the left of the lower 
part of the sternum near the fifth intercostal space.
■	 The mitral valve is heard over the apex of the heart in 
the left fifth intercostal space at the midclavicular line.
■	 The pulmonary valve is heard over the medial end of the 
left second intercostal space.
■	 The aortic valve is heard over the medial end of the right 
second intercostal space.
Visualizing the pleural cavities and lungs, pleural 
recesses, and lung lobes and fissures
Palpable surface landmarks can be used to visualize the 
normal outlines of the pleural cavities and the lungs 
and to determine the positions of the pulmonary lobes 
and fissures.
Fig. 3.110  Anterior view of the chest wall of a man showing skeletal structures, heart, location of the heart valves, and auscultation points. 
Aortic valve
Pulmonary valve
Auscultation position
for aortic valve
Tricuspid valve
Auscultation position
for tricuspid valve
Auscultation position
for pulmonary valve
Mitral valve
Auscultation position
for mitral valve

=== PAGE 242 ===
3
241
Surface Anatomy  •  Visualizing the Pleural Cavities and Lungs, Pleural Recesses, and Lung Lobes and Fissures
Fig. 3.111  Views of the chest wall showing the surface projections of the lobes and the fissures of the lungs. A. Anterior view in a woman. On 
the right side, the superior, middle, and inferior lobes are illustrated. On the left side, the superior and inferior lobes are illustrated. 
B. Posterior view in a woman. On both sides, the superior and inferior lobes are illustrated. The middle lobe on the right side is not visible in 
this view. 
Superior lobe
Inferior lobe
Costomediastinal
recess
Superior lobe
Horizontal fissure
Inferior lobe
Middle lobe
A
Rib X
Parietal pleura
Rib VIII
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Rib VI
TXII
TX
TIV
Upper lobe
Lower lobe
Parietal pleura
Oblique fissure
Rib V
Rib VI
Rib X
B

=== PAGE 243 ===
Thorax
242
In quiet respiration, the inferior margin of the lungs 
travels around the thoracic wall following a VI, VIII, X 
contour (i.e., rib VI in the midclavicular line, rib VIII in the 
midaxillary line, and vertebra TX posteriorly).
In the posterior view, the oblique fissure on both sides 
is located in the midline near the spine of vertebra TIV 
(Figs. 3.111B and 3.112A). It moves laterally in a down­
ward direction, crossing the fourth and fifth intercostal 
spaces and reaches rib VI laterally.
In the anterior view, the horizontal fissure on the right 
side follows the contour of rib IV and its costal cartilage 
and the oblique fissures on both sides follow the contour of 
rib VI and its costal cartilage (Fig. 3.112B).
Where to listen for lung sounds
The stethoscope placements for listening for lung sounds 
are shown in Fig. 3.113.
Fig. 3.112  Views of the chest wall. A. Posterior view in a woman with arms abducted and hands positioned behind her head. On both sides, 
the superior and inferior lobes of the lungs are illustrated. When the scapula is rotated into this position, the medial border of the scapula 
parallels the position of the oblique fissure and can be used as a guide for determining the surface projection of the superior and inferior lobes 
of the lungs. B. Lateral view in a man with his right arm abducted. The superior, middle, and inferior lobes of the right lung are illustrated. The 
oblique fissure begins posteriorly at the level of the spine of vertebra TIV, passes inferiorly crossing rib IV, the fourth intercostal space, and rib V. 
It crosses the fifth intercostal space at the midaxillary line and continues anteriorly along the contour of rib VI. The horizontal fissure crosses rib 
V in the midaxillary space and continues anteriorly, crossing the fourth intercostal space and following the contour of rib IV and its costal 
cartilage to the sternum. 
Medial margin
of scapula
Superior lobe
Inferior lobe
TIV spine
Oblique fissure
A
Superior lobe
Middle lobe
Horizontal fissure
Midaxillary line
TIV spine
Inferior lobe
Rib V
Rib VI
Rib X
Rib VIII
Oblique fissure
Costodiaphragmatic
recess
Parietal pleura
B

=== PAGE 250 ===
Thorax
247.e2
Case 5
CHEST WOUND
A 35-year-old man was shot during an armed robbery. The 
bullet entry wound was in the right fourth intercostal 
space, above the nipple. A chest radiograph obtained on 
admission to the emergency room demonstrated complete 
collapse of the lung.
A further chest radiograph performed 20 minutes later 
demonstrated an air/fluid level in the pleural cavity 
(eFig. 3.117).
Three common pathological processes may occur in the 
pleural cavity.
■	 If air is introduced into the pleural cavity, a 
pneumothorax develops and the lung collapses because 
of its own elastic recoil. The pleural space fills with air, 
which may further compress the lung. Most patients with 
a collapsed lung are unlikely to have respiratory 
impairment. Under certain conditions, air may enter the 
pleural cavity at such a rate that it shifts and pushes the 
mediastinum to the opposite side of the chest. This is 
called tension pneumothorax and is potentially lethal, 
requiring urgent treatment by insertion of an intercostal 
tube to remove the air. The commonest causes of 
pneumothorax are rib fractures and positive pressure 
ventilation lung damage.
■	 The pleural cavity may fill with fluid (a pleural effusion) 
and this can be associated with many diseases 
(e.g., lung infection, cancer, abdominal sepsis). It is 
important to aspirate fluid from these patients to relieve 
any respiratory impairment and to carry out laboratory 
tests on the fluid to determine its nature.
■	 Severe chest trauma can lead to development of 
hemopneumothorax. A tube must be inserted to remove 
the blood and air that has entered the pleural space and 
prevent respiratory impairment.
This man needs treatment to drain either the air or fluid or 
both.
The pleural space can be accessed by passing a needle 
between the ribs into the pleural cavity. In a normal healthy 
adult, the pleural space is virtually nonexistent; therefore, 
any attempt to introduce a needle into this space is unlikely 
eFig. 3.117  Chest radiograph demonstrating an air/fluid level in 
the pleural cavity. 
Case 4
LUNG CANCER
A 52-year-old man presented with headaches and shortness 
of breath. He also complained of coughing up small 
volumes of blood. Clinical examination revealed multiple 
dilated veins around the neck. A chest radiograph 
demonstrated an elevated diaphragm on the right and a 
tumor mass, which was believed to be a primary 
bronchogenic carcinoma.
By observing the clinical findings and applying anatomical 
knowledge, the site of the tumor can be inferred.
The multiple dilated veins around the neck are indicative of 
venous obstruction. The veins are dilated on both sides of 
the neck, implying that the obstruction must be within a 
common vessel, the superior vena cava. Anterior to the 
superior vena cava in the right side of the chest is the 
phrenic nerve, which supplies the diaphragm. Because the 
diaphragm is elevated, suggesting paralysis, it is clear that 
the phrenic nerve has been involved with the tumor.

=== PAGE 254 ===
Thorax
247.e6
Case 9
PNEUMONIA
A 35-year-old male patient presented to his family 
practitioner because of recent weight loss (14 lb over the 
previous 2 months). He also complained of a cough with 
streaks of blood in the sputum (hemoptysis) and left-sided 
chest pain. Recently, he noticed significant sweating, 
especially at night, which necessitated changing his sheets.
On examination the patient had a low-grade temperature 
and was tachypneic (breathing fast). There was reduced 
expansion of the left side of the chest. When the chest was 
percussed it was noted that the anterior aspect of the left 
chest was dull, compared to the resonant percussion note 
of the remainder of the chest. Auscultation (listening with a 
stethoscope) revealed decreased breath sounds, which 
were hoarse in nature (bronchial breathing).
A diagnosis of chest infection was made.
Chest infection is a common disease. In most patients the 
infection affects the large airways and bronchi. If the 
infection continues, exudates and transudates are produced, 
filling the alveoli and the secondary pulmonary lobules. The 
diffuse patchy nature of this type of infection is termed 
bronchial pneumonia.
Given the patient’s specific clinical findings, bronchial 
pneumonia was unlikely.
From the clinical findings it was clear that the patient was 
likely to have a pneumonia confined to a lobe. Because there 
are only two lobes in the left lung, the likely diagnosis was a 
left upper lobe pneumonia.
A chest radiograph was obtained (eFig. 3.121). The 
posteroanterior view of the chest demonstrated an area of 
veil-like opacification throughout the whole of the left lung.
Knowing the position of the oblique fissure, any 
consolidation within the left upper lobe will produce this 
veil-like shadowing. Lateral radiographs are usually not 
necessary but would demonstrate opacification anteriorly 
and superiorly that ends abruptly at the oblique fissure.
Upper lobe pneumonias are unusual because most patients 
develop gravity-dependent infection. Certain infections, 
however, are typical within the middle and upper lobes, 
commonly, tuberculosis (TB) and histoplasmosis.
A review of the patient’s history suggested a serious and 
chronic illness and the patient was admitted to hospital.
After admission a bronchoscopy was carried out and sputum 
was aspirated from the left upper lobe bronchus. This was 
cultured in the laboratory and also viewed under the 
microscope and tuberculous bacilli (TB) were identified.
eFig. 3.121  Chest radiograph showing left upper lobe infection. 

=== PAGE 255 ===
3
Clinical Cases  •  Case 10
247.e7
Case 10
ESOPHAGEAL CANCER
A 68-year-old man came to his family physician complaining 
of discomfort when swallowing (dysphagia). The physician 
examined the patient and noted since his last visit he had 
lost approximately 18 lb over 6 months. Routine blood tests 
revealed the patient was anemic and he was referred to the 
gastroenterology unit. A diagnosis of esophageal cancer 
was made and the patient underwent a resection, which 
involved a chest and abdominal incision. After 4 years the 
patient remains well though still subject to follow-up.
The patient underwent a flexible endoscopic examination of 
the esophagus in which a tube is placed through the mouth 
and into the esophagus and a camera is placed on the end 
of the tube. It is also possible to use biopsy forceps to obtain 
small portions of tissue for adequate diagnosis.
The diagnosis of esophageal carcinoma was made 
(squamous cell type) and the patient underwent a staging 
procedure.
Staging of any malignancy is important because it 
determines the extent of treatment and allows the physician 
to determine the patient’s prognosis. In this case our patient 
underwent a CT scan of the chest and abdomen, which 
revealed no significant lymph nodes around the lower third 
esophageal tumor.
The abdominal scan revealed no evidence of spread to the 
nodes around the celiac trunk and no evidence of spread to 
the liver.
Bleeding was the cause of the anemia.
Many tumors of the gastrointestinal system are remarkably 
friable, and with the passage of digested material across the 
tumor, low-grade chronic bleeding occurs. Over a period of 
time the patient is rendered anemic, which in the first 
instance is asymptomatic; however, it can be diagnosed on 
routine blood tests.
Complex surgery is planned.
The length of the esophagus is approximately 22 cm. Tumor 
spread can occur through the submucosal route and also 
through locoregional lymph nodes. The lymph nodes drain 
along the arterial supply to the esophagus, which is 
predominantly supplied by the inferior thyroid artery, 
esophageal branches from the thoracic aorta, and branches 
from the left gastric artery. The transthoracic esophagectomy 
procedure involves placing the patient supine. A laparotomy 
is performed to assess for any evidence of disease in the 
abdominal cavity. The stomach is mobilized, with 
preservation of the right gastric and right gastro-omental 
arteries. The short gastric vessels and left gastric vessels are 
divided, and a pyloromyotomy is also performed.
The abdominal wound is then closed and the patient is 
placed in the left lateral position. A right posterolateral 
thoracotomy is performed through the fifth intercostal space, 
and the azygos vein is divided to provide full access to the 
whole length of the esophagus. The stomach is delivered 
through the diaphragmatic hiatus. The esophagus is resected 
and the stomach is anastomosed to the cervical esophagus.
The patient made an uneventful recovery.
Most esophageal cancers are diagnosed relatively late and 
often have lymph node metastatic spread. A number of 
patients will also have a spread of tumor to the liver. The 
overall prognosis for esophageal cancer is poor, with 
approximately a 25%, 5-year survival rate.
Diagnosing esophageal cancer in its early stages before 
lymph node spread is ideal and can produce a curative 
procedure.
Our patient went on to have chemotherapy and enjoys a 
good quality of life 4 years after his operation.

=== PAGE 258 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  General Description
4
251
pelvic wall at the pelvic inlet. Superficially, the inferior 
limit of the abdominal wall is the superior margin of the 
lower limb.
The chamber enclosed by the abdominal wall contains 
a single large peritoneal cavity, which freely communi­
cates with the pelvic cavity.
Conceptual overview
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The abdomen is a roughly cylindrical chamber extending 
from the inferior margin of the thorax to the superior 
margin of the pelvis and the lower limb (Fig. 4.1A).
The inferior thoracic aperture forms the superior 
opening to the abdomen and is closed by the diaphragm. 
Inferiorly, the deep abdominal wall is continuous with the 
Diaphragm
A
Inferior thoracic aperture
Iliac crest
Pelvic inlet
Abdominal wall
Inguinal ligament
Lower limb
Fig. 4.1  Abdomen. A. Boundaries. 

=== PAGE 259 ===
Abdomen
252
Costal margin
Mesentery
Aorta
Left kidney
Right kidney
Muscles
Inferior vena cava
Peritoneal  cavity
Gastrointestinal
tract
B
B. Arrangement of abdominal contents. Inferior view. 
Fig. 4.1, cont’d
Abdominal viscera are either suspended in the perito­
neal cavity by mesenteries or positioned between the cavity 
and the musculoskeletal wall (Fig. 4.1B).
Abdominal viscera include:
■	 major elements of the gastrointestinal system—the 
caudal end of the esophagus, stomach, small and large 
intestines, liver, pancreas, and gallbladder;
■	 the spleen;
■	 components of the urinary system—kidneys and 
ureters;
■	 the suprarenal glands; and
■	 major neurovascular structures.
FUNCTIONS
Houses and protects major viscera
The abdomen houses major elements of the gastrointestinal 
system (Fig. 4.2), the spleen, and parts of the urinary 
system.
Much of the liver, gallbladder, stomach, and spleen and 
parts of the colon are under the domes of the diaphragm, 
which project superiorly above the costal margin of the 
thoracic wall, and as a result these abdominal viscera are 
protected by the thoracic wall. The superior poles of the 
kidneys are deep to the lower ribs.
Viscera not under the domes of the diaphragm are sup­
ported and protected predominantly by the muscular walls 
of the abdomen.

=== PAGE 261 ===
Abdomen
254
Breathing
One of the most important roles of the abdominal wall is 
to assist in breathing:
■	 It relaxes during inspiration to accommodate expansion 
of the thoracic cavity and the inferior displacement of 
abdominal viscera during contraction of the diaphragm 
(Fig. 4.3).
■	 During expiration, it contracts to assist in elevating 
the domes of the diaphragm, thus reducing thoracic 
volume.
Material can be expelled from the airway by forced 
expiration using the abdominal muscles, as in coughing or 
sneezing.
Changes in intraabdominal pressure
Contraction of abdominal wall muscles can dramatically 
increase intraabdominal pressure when the diaphragm is 
Fig. 4.3  The abdomen assists in breathing. 
Inspiration
Expiration
Diaphragm
Relaxation of 
diaphragm
Contraction of
diaphragm
Contraction of 
abdominal 
muscles
Relaxation of
abdominal
muscles
Fig. 4.4  Increasing intraabdominal pressure to assist in micturition, 
defecation, and childbirth. 
Laryngeal 
cavity closed
Air retained 
in thorax
Fixed diaphragm
Contraction of 
abdominal wall
Increase in
intraabdominal
pressure
Micturition
Child birth
Defecation
in a fixed position (Fig. 4.4). Air is retained in the lungs by 
closing valves in the larynx in the neck. Increased intra-
abdominal pressure assists in voiding the contents of the 
bladder and rectum and in giving birth.

=== PAGE 262 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
4
255
Fig. 4.5  Abdominal wall. A. Skeletal elements. B. Muscles. 
External oblique
Internal oblique
Transversus
abdominis
Psoas major
Rectus 
abdominis
Gap between inguinal
ligament and pelvic bone
Quadratus
lumborum
Iliacus
Costal margin
Rib XII
Iliolumbar
ligament
Pelvic inlet
Inguinal ligament
A
B
COMPONENT PARTS
Wall
The abdominal wall consists partly of bone but mainly 
of muscle (Fig. 4.5). The skeletal elements of the wall 
(Fig. 4.5A) are:
■	 the five lumbar vertebrae and their intervening inter­
vertebral discs,
■	 the superior expanded parts of the pelvic bones, and
■	 bony components of the inferior thoracic wall, includ­
ing the costal margin, rib XII, the end of rib XI, and the 
xiphoid process.
Muscles make up the rest of the abdominal wall 
(Fig. 4.5B):
■	 Lateral to the vertebral column, the quadratus lumbo­
rum, psoas major, and iliacus muscles reinforce the 
posterior aspect of the wall. The distal ends of the psoas 
major and iliacus muscles pass into the thigh and are 
major flexors of the hip joint.
■	 Lateral parts of the abdominal wall are predominantly 
formed by three layers of muscles, which are similar in 
orientation to the intercostal muscles of the thorax—
transversus abdominis, internal oblique, and external 
oblique.

=== PAGE 263 ===
Abdomen
256
■	 Intraperitoneal structures, such as elements of the 
gastrointestinal system, are suspended from the abdomi­
nal wall by mesenteries;
■	 Structures that are not suspended in the abdominal 
cavity by a mesentery and that lie between the parietal 
peritoneum and abdominal wall are retroperitoneal 
in position.
Retroperitoneal structures include the kidneys and 
ureters, which develop in the region between the perito­
neum and the abdominal wall and remain in this position 
in the adult.
During development, some organs, such as parts of the 
small and large intestines, are suspended initially in the 
abdominal cavity by a mesentery, and later become retro­
peritoneal secondarily by fusing with the abdominal wall 
(Fig. 4.7).
■	 Anteriorly, a segmented muscle (the rectus abdominis) 
on each side spans the distance between the inferior 
thoracic wall and the pelvis.
Structural continuity between posterior, lateral, and 
anterior parts of the abdominal wall is provided by 
thick fascia posteriorly and by flat tendinous sheets 
(aponeuroses) derived from muscles of the lateral wall. A 
fascial layer of varying thickness separates the abdominal 
wall from the peritoneum, which lines the abdominal 
cavity.
Abdominal cavity
The general organization of the abdominal cavity is one 
in which a central gut tube (gastrointestinal system) is 
suspended from the posterior abdominal wall and partly 
from the anterior abdominal wall by thin sheets of tissue 
(mesenteries; Fig. 4.6):
■	 a ventral (anterior) mesentery for proximal regions of 
the gut tube;
■	 a dorsal (posterior) mesentery along the entire length of 
the system.
Different parts of these two mesenteries are named 
according to the organs they suspend or with which they 
are associated.
Major viscera, such as the kidneys, that are not sus­
pended in the abdominal cavity by mesenteries are associ­
ated with the abdominal wall.
The abdominal cavity is lined by peritoneum, which 
consists of an epithelial-like single layer of cells (the meso­
thelium) together with a supportive layer of connective 
tissue. Peritoneum is similar to the pleura and serous 
pericardium in the thorax.
The peritoneum reflects off the abdominal wall to 
become a component of the mesenteries that suspend the 
viscera.
■	 Parietal peritoneum lines the abdominal wall.
■	 Visceral peritoneum covers suspended organs.
Normally, elements of the gastrointestinal tract and 
its derivatives completely fill the abdominal cavity, 
making the peritoneal cavity a potential space, and 
visceral peritoneum on organs and parietal peritoneum 
on the adjacent abdominal wall slide freely against one 
another.
Abdominal viscera are either intraperitoneal or 
retroperitoneal:
Fig. 4.6  The gut tube is suspended by mesenteries. 
Branch of aorta
Gastrointestinal tract
Aorta
Dorsal mesentery
Ventral mesentery
Kidney—posterior to
peritoneum
Visceral peritoneum
Parietal peritoneum

=== PAGE 265 ===
Abdomen
258
Fig. 4.8  Inferior thoracic aperture and the diaphragm. 
Esophageal opening
Costal margin
Median arcuate ligament
Medial arcuate ligament
Lateral arcuate
ligament
Left crus
Right crus
Quadratus lumborum
Psoas major
Large vessels, nerves, and lymphatics are associated 
with the posterior abdominal wall along the median axis 
of the body in the region where, during development, the 
peritoneum reflects off the wall as the dorsal mesentery, 
which supports the developing gut tube. As a consequence, 
branches of the neurovascular structures that pass to parts 
of the gastrointestinal system are unpaired, originate from 
the anterior aspects of their parent structures, and travel 
in mesenteries or pass retroperitoneally in areas where the 
mesenteries secondarily fuse to the wall.
Generally, vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to the abdomi­
nal wall and to organs that originate as retroperitoneal 
structures branch laterally from the central neurovascular 
structures and are usually paired, one on each side.
Inferior thoracic aperture
The superior aperture of the abdomen is the inferior 
thoracic aperture, which is closed by the diaphragm (see 
pp. 126-127). The margin of the inferior thoracic aperture 
consists of vertebra TXII, rib XII, the distal end of rib XI, 
the costal margin, and the xiphoid process of the sternum.
Diaphragm
The musculotendinous diaphragm separates the abdomen 
from the thorax.
The diaphragm attaches to the margin of the inferior 
thoracic aperture, but the attachment is complex posteri­
orly and extends into the lumbar area of the vertebral 
column (Fig. 4.8). On each side, a muscular extension 
(crus) firmly anchors the diaphragm to the anterolateral 
surface of the vertebral column as far down as vertebra LIII 
on the right and vertebra LII on the left.
Because the costal margin is not complete posteriorly, 
the diaphragm is anchored to arch-shaped (arcuate) liga­
ments, which span the distance between available bony 
points and the intervening soft tissues:

=== PAGE 266 ===
4
259
Conceptual Overview  •  Relationship to Other Regions
Fig. 4.9  Pelvic inlet. 
Ala of sacrum
S I
L V
Pelvic inlet
Inguinal ligament
Pelvic bone
■	 Medial and lateral arcuate ligaments cross muscles 
of the posterior abdominal wall and attach to vertebrae, 
the transverse processes of vertebra LI and rib XII, 
respectively.
■	 A median arcuate ligament crosses the aorta and is 
continuous with the crus on each side.
The posterior attachment of the diaphragm extends 
much farther inferiorly than the anterior attachment. 
Consequently, the diaphragm is an important component 
of the posterior abdominal wall, to which a number of 
viscera are related.
Pelvic inlet
The abdominal wall is continuous with the pelvic wall at 
the pelvic inlet, and the abdominal cavity is continuous 
with the pelvic cavity.
The circular margin of the pelvic inlet is formed entirely 
by bone:
■	 posteriorly by the sacrum,
■	 anteriorly by the pubic symphysis, and
■	 laterally, on each side, by a distinct bony rim on the 
pelvic bone (Fig. 4.9).
Because of the way in which the sacrum and attached 
pelvic bones are angled posteriorly on the vertebral column, 
the pelvic cavity is not oriented in the same vertical plane 
as the abdominal cavity. Instead, the pelvic cavity projects 
posteriorly, and the inlet opens anteriorly and somewhat 
superiorly (Fig. 4.10).
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGIONS
Thorax
The abdomen is separated from the thorax by the dia­
phragm. Structures pass between the two regions through 
or posterior to the diaphragm (see Fig. 4.8).
Pelvis
The pelvic inlet opens directly into the abdomen and struc­
tures pass between the abdomen and pelvis through it.
The peritoneum lining the abdominal cavity is continu­
ous with the peritoneum in the pelvis. Consequently, the 
Thoracic wall
Axis of abdominal 
cavity
Abdominal
 cavity
Pelvic cavity
Pelvic inlet
Axis of pelvic 
cavity
Fig. 4.10  Orientation of abdominal and pelvic cavities. 

=== PAGE 267 ===
Abdomen
260
Fig. 4.11  The abdominal cavity is continuous with the pelvic cavity. 
Rectum
Peritoneum
Pelvic inlet
Bladder
Uterus
Shadow of ureter
Shadow of internal iliac vessels
abdominal cavity is entirely continuous with the pelvic 
cavity (Fig. 4.11). Infections in one region can therefore 
freely spread into the other.
The bladder expands superiorly from the pelvic cavity 
into the abdominal cavity and, during pregnancy, the 
uterus expands freely superiorly out of the pelvic cavity 
into the abdominal cavity.
Lower limb
The abdomen communicates directly with the thigh 
through an aperture formed anteriorly between the inferior 
margin of the abdominal wall (marked by the inguinal 
ligament) and the pelvic bone (Fig. 4.12). Structures that 
pass through this aperture are:
■	 the major artery and vein of the lower limb;
■	 the femoral nerve, which innervates the quadriceps 
femoris muscle, which extends the knee;
■	 lymphatics; and
■	 the distal ends of psoas major and iliacus muscles, 
which flex the thigh at the hip joint.
As vessels pass inferior to the inguinal ligament, their 
names change—the external iliac artery and vein of the 
abdomen become the femoral artery and vein of the thigh.

=== PAGE 268 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
4
261
tube suspended from the wall by both the ventral and 
dorsal mesenteries.
A diverticulum from the anterior aspect of the foregut 
grows into the ventral mesentery, giving rise to the liver 
and gallbladder, and, ultimately, to the ventral part of the 
pancreas.
The dorsal part of the pancreas develops from an out­
growth of the foregut into the dorsal mesentery. The spleen 
develops in the dorsal mesentery in the region between the 
body wall and presumptive stomach.
In the foregut, the developing stomach rotates clockwise 
and the associated dorsal mesentery, containing the spleen, 
moves to the left and greatly expands. During this process, 
part of the mesentery becomes associated with, and sec­
ondarily fuses with, the left side of the body wall.
At the same time, the duodenum, together with its 
dorsal mesentery and an appreciable part of the pancreas, 
swings to the right and fuses to the body wall.
Secondary fusion of the duodenum to the body wall, 
massive growth of the liver in the ventral mesentery, and 
fusion of the superior surface of the liver to the diaphragm 
restrict the opening to the space enclosed by the ballooned 
dorsal mesentery associated with the stomach. This 
restricted opening is the omental foramen (epiploic 
foramen).
The part of the abdominal cavity enclosed by the 
expanded dorsal mesentery, and posterior to the stomach, 
is the omental bursa (lesser sac). Access, through the 
omental foramen, to this space from the rest of the perito­
neal cavity (greater sac) is inferior to the free edge of the 
ventral mesentery.
Part of the dorsal mesentery that initially forms part of 
the lesser sac greatly enlarges in an inferior direction, and 
the two opposing surfaces of the mesentery fuse to form an 
apron-like structure (the greater omentum). The greater 
omentum is suspended from the greater curvature of the 
stomach, lies over other viscera in the abdominal cavity, 
and is the first structure observed when the abdominal 
cavity is opened anteriorly.
Development of the midgut
The midgut develops into the distal part of the duodenum 
and the jejunum, ileum, ascending colon, and proximal 
two-thirds of the transverse colon. A small yolk sac pro­
jects anteriorly from the developing midgut into the 
umbilicus.
Rapid growth of the gastrointestinal system results in a 
loop of the midgut herniating out of the abdominal cavity 
and into the umbilical cord. As the body grows in size and 
the connection with the yolk sac is lost, the midgut returns 
to the abdominal cavity. While this process is occurring, 
the two limbs of the midgut loop rotate counterclockwise 
KEY FEATURES
Arrangement of abdominal viscera 
in the adult
A basic knowledge of the development of the gastro­
intestinal tract is needed to understand the arrangement 
of viscera and mesenteries in the abdomen (Fig. 4.13).
The early gastrointestinal tract is oriented longitudinally 
in the body cavity and is suspended from surrounding 
walls by a large dorsal mesentery and a much smaller 
ventral mesentery.
Superiorly, the dorsal and ventral mesenteries are 
anchored to the diaphragm.
The primitive gut tube consists of the foregut, the 
midgut, and the hindgut. Massive longitudinal growth of 
the gut tube, rotation of selected parts of the tube, and 
secondary fusion of some viscera and their associated 
mesenteries to the body wall participate in generating the 
adult arrangement of abdominal organs.
Development of the foregut
In abdominal regions, the foregut gives rise to the distal 
end of the esophagus, the stomach, and the proximal part 
of the duodenum. The foregut is the only part of the gut 
Fig. 4.12  Structures passing between the abdomen and thigh. 
LV vertebra
Inguinal ligament
Psoas major
 muscle
Iliacus muscle
LIV vertebra
Aorta
Inferior vena cava

=== PAGE 271 ===
Abdomen
264
around their combined central axis, and the part of the 
loop that becomes the cecum descends into the inferior 
right aspect of the cavity. The superior mesenteric artery, 
which supplies the midgut, is at the center of the axis of 
rotation.
The cecum remains intraperitoneal, the ascending 
colon fuses with the body wall becoming secondarily retro­
peritoneal, and the transverse colon remains suspended by 
its dorsal mesentery (transverse mesocolon). The greater 
omentum hangs over the transverse colon and the meso­
colon and usually fuses with these structures.
Development of the hindgut
The distal one-third of the transverse colon, descending 
colon, sigmoid colon, and superior part of the rectum 
develop from the hindgut.
Proximal parts of the hindgut swing to the left and 
become the descending colon and sigmoid colon. The 
descending colon and its dorsal mesentery fuse to the body 
wall, while the sigmoid colon remains intraperitoneal. The 
sigmoid colon passes through the pelvic inlet and is con­
tinuous with the rectum at the level of vertebra SIII.
Skin and muscles of the anterior 
and lateral abdominal wall 
and thoracic intercostal nerves
The anterior rami of thoracic spinal nerves T7 to T12 
follow the inferior slope of the lateral parts of the ribs 
and cross the costal margin to enter the abdominal 
wall (Fig. 4.14). Intercostal nerves T7 to T11 supply 
skin and muscle of the abdominal wall, as does the subcos­
tal nerve T12. In addition, T5 and T6 supply upper parts 
of the external oblique muscle of the abdominal wall; 
T6 also supplies cutaneous innervation to skin over the 
xiphoid.
Skin and muscle in the inguinal and suprapubic regions 
of the abdominal wall are innervated by L1 and not by 
thoracic nerves.
Dermatomes of the anterior abdominal wall are indi­
cated in Figure 4.14. In the midline, skin over the infraster­
nal angle is T6 and that around the umbilicus is T10. L1 
innervates skin in the inguinal and suprapubic regions.
Muscles of the abdominal wall are innervated segmen­
tally in patterns that generally reflect the patterns of the 
overlying dermatomes.
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
Fig. 4.14  Innervation of the anterior abdominal wall. 

=== PAGE 272 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
4
265
Gubernaculum
Muscle wall
Processus vaginalis
Genital tubercle
A
Urogenital membrane
Labioscrotal swelling
Gonad
Fig. 4.15  Inguinal region. A. Development. 
The groin is a weak area in the anterior 
abdominal wall
During development, the gonads in both sexes descend 
from their sites of origin on the posterior abdominal wall 
into the pelvic cavity in women and the developing scrotum 
in men (Fig. 4.15).
Before descent, a cord of tissue (the gubernaculum) 
passes through the anterior abdominal wall and connects 
the inferior pole of each gonad with primordia of the 
scrotum in men and the labia majora in women (labioscro­
tal swellings).
A tubular extension (the processus vaginalis) of the 
peritoneal cavity and the accompanying muscular layers 
of the anterior abdominal wall project along the guber­
naculum on each side into the labioscrotal swellings.
In men, the testis, together with its neurovascular struc­
tures and its efferent duct (the ductus deferens) descends 
into the scrotum along a path, initially defined by the 
gubernaculum, between the processus vaginalis and the 
accompanying coverings derived from the abdominal wall. 
All that remains of the gubernaculum is a connective 
tissue remnant that attaches the caudal pole of the testis 
to the scrotum.
The inguinal canal is the passage through the 
anterior abdominal wall created by the processus vagina­
lis. The spermatic cord is the tubular extension of the 
layers of the abdominal wall into the scrotum that con­
tains all structures passing between the testis and the 
abdomen.
The distal sac-like terminal end of the spermatic cord on 
each side contains the testis, associated structures, and the 
now isolated part of the peritoneal cavity (the cavity of the 
tunica vaginalis).
In women, the gonads descend to a position just inside 
the pelvic cavity and never pass through the anterior 
abdominal wall. As a result, the only major structure 
passing through the inguinal canal is a derivative of the 
gubernaculum (the round ligament of the uterus).
In both men and women, the groin (inguinal region) is 
a weak area in the abdominal wall (Fig. 4.15) and is the 
site of inguinal hernias.

=== PAGE 273 ===
Abdomen
266
Inferior vena cava
Right testicular artery
Left testicular artery
Right testicular vein
Left testicular vein
Aorta
Pelvic brim
Left ductus deferens
Ductus deferens
Inguinal canal
Superficial
 inguinal ring
Deep inguinal ring
Spermatic cord
Remnant of
gubernaculum
Epididymis
Testis
Tunica vaginalis
Testicular
artery and vein
B
Inferior vena cava
Aorta
Left renal artery
Left ovarian artery
Left renal vein
Left ovarian vein
Pelvic inlet
Uterine tube
Round ligament 
of uterus (remnants
of gubernaculum)
Uterus
Superficial
inguinal ring
C
B. In men. C. In women. 
Fig. 4.15, cont’d

=== PAGE 276 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
4
269
Venous shunts from left to right
All blood returning to the heart from regions of the body 
other than the lungs flows into the right atrium of the 
heart. The inferior vena cava is the major systemic vein in 
the abdomen and drains this region together with the 
pelvis, perineum, and both lower limbs (Fig. 4.18).
The inferior vena cava lies to the right of the verte­
bral column and penetrates the central tendon of the 
Fig. 4.18  Left-to-right venous shunts. 
6XSHULRUYHQDFDYD
+HDUW
5LJKWDWULXP
'LDSKUDJP
5LJKWVXSUDUHQDOYHLQ
/HIWUHQDOYHLQ
5LJKWJRQDGDOYHLQ
/HIWJRQDGDOYHLQ
/HIWVXSUDUHQDOYHLQ
/HIWOXPEDUYHLQ
/HIWFRPPRQLOLDFYHLQ
3HOYLFLQOHW
diaphragm at approximately vertebral level TVIII. A 
number of large vessels cross the midline to deliver 
blood from the left side of the body to the inferior vena 
cava.
■	 One of the most significant is the left renal vein, which 
drains the kidney, suprarenal gland, and gonad on the 
same side.

=== PAGE 278 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
4
271
portal vein as it enters the liver. The small veins that 
accompany this ligament form a connection between the 
portal system and para-umbilical regions of the abdominal 
wall, which drain into systemic veins.
Other regions where portal and caval systems inter­
connect include:
■	 where the liver is in direct contact with the diaphragm 
(the bare area of the liver);
■	 where the wall of the gastrointestinal tract is in direct 
contact with the posterior abdominal wall (retroperito­
neal areas of the large and small intestine); and
■	 the posterior surface of the pancreas (much of the 
pancreas is secondarily retroperitoneal).
Blockage of the hepatic portal vein or of vascular 
channels in the liver
Blockage of the hepatic portal vein or of vascular chan­
nels in the liver can affect the pattern of venous return 
from abdominal parts of the gastrointestinal system. 
Vessels that interconnect the portal and caval systems 
can become greatly enlarged and tortuous, allowing 
blood in tributaries of the portal system to bypass the 
liver, enter the caval system, and thereby return to the 
heart. Portal hypertension can result in esophageal and 
rectal varices and in caput medusae in which systemic 
vessels that radiate from para-umbilical veins enlarge and 
become visible on the abdominal wall.
Venous blood from the digestive tract, pancreas, gall­
bladder, and spleen enters the inferior surface of the liver 
through the large hepatic portal vein. This vein then 
ramifies like an artery to distribute blood to small 
endothelial-lined hepatic sinusoids, which form the vascu­
lar exchange network of the liver.
After passing through the sinusoids, the blood collects 
in a number of short hepatic veins, which drain into the 
inferior vena cava just before the inferior vena cava pene­
trates the diaphragm and enters the right atrium of the 
heart.
Normally, vascular beds drained by the hepatic portal 
system interconnect, through small veins, with beds 
drained by systemic vessels, which ultimately connect 
directly with either the superior or inferior vena cava.
Portacaval anastomoses
Among the clinically most important regions of overlap 
between the portal and caval systems are those at each end 
of the abdominal part of the gastrointestinal system:
■	 around the inferior end of the esophagus;
■	 around the inferior part of the rectum.
Small veins that accompany the degenerate umbilical 
vein (round ligament of  the liver) establish another 
important portacaval anastomosis.
The round ligament of the liver connects the umbilicus 
of the anterior abdominal wall with the left branch of the 

=== PAGE 280 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Surface Topography
4
273
associated with abdominal problems. The two schemes 
most often used are:
■	 a four-quadrant pattern and
■	 a nine-region pattern.
Four-quadrant pattern
A horizontal transumbilical plane passing through the 
umbilicus and the intervertebral disc between vertebrae 
LIII and LIV and intersecting with the vertical median 
plane divides the abdomen into four quadrants—the 
right upper, left upper, right lower, and left lower quadrants 
(Fig. 4.22).
Regional anatomy
The abdomen is the part of the trunk inferior to the 
thorax (Fig. 4.21). Its musculomembranous walls sur­
round a large cavity (the abdominal cavity), which is 
bounded superiorly by the diaphragm and inferiorly by the 
pelvic inlet.
The abdominal cavity may extend superiorly as high as 
the fourth intercostal space, and is continuous inferiorly 
with the pelvic cavity. It contains the peritoneal cavity 
and the abdominal viscera.
SURFACE TOPOGRAPHY
Topographical divisions of the abdomen are used to 
describe the location of abdominal organs and the pain 
Fig. 4.21  Boundaries of the abdominal cavity. 
Diaphragm
Sternum
Abdominal cavity
Pelvic cavity
Pubic symphysis
Pelvic inlet
Fig. 4.22  Four-quadrant topographical pattern. 
Transumbilical plane
Median plane
Right upper
quadrant
Left upper
quadrant
Right lower
quadrant
Left lower
quadrant

=== PAGE 281 ===
Abdomen
274
Fig. 4.23  Nine-region organizational pattern. 
Subcostal plane
Intertubercular plane
Midclavicular planes
Right
hypochondrium
Right flank
Right groin
Left
hypochondrium
Left flank
Left groin
Epigastric region
Umbilical region
Pubic region
In the clinic
Surgical incisions
Access to the abdomen and its contents is usually 
obtained through incisions in the anterior abdominal wall. 
Traditionally, incisions have been placed at and around the 
region of surgical interest. The size of these incisions 
was usually large to allow good access and optimal 
visualization of the abdominal cavity. As anesthesia has 
developed and muscle-relaxing drugs have become widely 
used, the abdominal incisions have become smaller.
Currently, the most commonly used large abdominal 
incision is a central craniocaudad incision from the 
xiphoid process to the symphysis pubis, which provides 
wide access to the whole of the abdominal contents 
and allows an exploratory procedure to be performed 
(laparotomy).
Nine-region pattern
The nine-region pattern is based on two horizontal and two 
vertical planes (Fig. 4.23).
■	 The superior horizontal plane (the subcostal plane) is 
immediately inferior to the costal margins, which places 
it at the lower border of the costal cartilage of rib X and 
passing posteriorly through the body of vertebra LIII. 
(Note, however, that sometimes the transpyloric 
plane, halfway between the jugular notch and the 
symphysis pubis or halfway between the umbilicus and 
the inferior end of the body of the sternum, passing 
posteriorly through the lower border of vertebra LI and 
intersecting with the costal margin at the ends of the 
ninth costal cartilages, is used instead.)
■	 The inferior horizontal plane (the intertubercular 
plane) connects the tubercles of the iliac crests, which 
are palpable structures 5 cm posterior to the anterior 
superior iliac spines, and passes through the upper part 
of the body of vertebra LV.
■	 The vertical planes pass from the midpoint of the clavi­
cles inferiorly to a point midway between the anterior 
superior iliac spine and pubic symphysis.
These four planes establish the topographical divisions 
in the nine-region organization. The following designa­
tions are used for each region: superiorly the right 
hypochondrium, the epigastric region, and the left hypo­
chondrium; inferiorly the right groin (inguinal region), 
pubic region, and left groin (inguinal region); and in the 
middle the right flank (lateral region), the umbilical region, 
and the left flank (lateral region) (Fig. 4.23).

=== PAGE 283 ===
Abdomen
276
In men, this superficial layer continues over the penis 
and, after losing its fat and fusing with the deeper layer of 
superficial fascia, continues into the scrotum where it 
forms a specialized fascial layer containing smooth muscle 
fibers (the dartos fascia). In women, this superficial layer 
retains some fat and is a component of the labia majora.
Deeper layer
The deeper membranous layer of superficial fascia (Scar­
pa’s fascia) is thin and membranous, and contains little 
or no fat (Fig. 4.25). Inferiorly, it continues into the thigh, 
but just below the inguinal ligament, it fuses with the deep 
fascia of the thigh (the fascia lata; Fig. 4.26). In the 
midline, it is firmly attached to the linea alba and the 
symphysis pubis. It continues into the anterior part of the 
perineum where it is firmly attached to the ischiopubic 
rami and to the posterior margin of the perineal mem­
brane. Here, it is referred to as the superficial perineal 
fascia (Colles’ fascia).
In men, the deeper membranous layer of superficial 
fascia blends with the superficial layer as they both pass 
over the penis, forming the superficial fascia of the penis, 
before they continue into the scrotum where they form the 
dartos fascia (Fig. 4.25). Also in men, extensions of the 
deeper membranous layer of superficial fascia attached to 
the pubic symphysis pass inferiorly onto the dorsum and 
ABDOMINAL WALL
The abdominal wall covers a large area. It is bounded 
superiorly by the xiphoid process and costal margins, pos­
teriorly by the vertebral column, and inferiorly by the 
upper parts of the pelvic bones. Its layers consist of skin, 
superficial fascia (subcutaneous tissue), muscles and their 
associated deep fascias, extraperitoneal fascia, and parietal 
peritoneum (Fig. 4.24).
Superficial fascia
The superficial fascia of the abdominal wall (subcutaneous 
tissue of abdomen) is a layer of fatty connective tissue. It is 
usually a single layer similar to, and continuous with, the 
superficial fascia throughout other regions of the body. 
However, in the lower region of the anterior part of the 
abdominal wall, below the umbilicus, it forms two layers: 
a superficial fatty layer and a deeper membranous layer.
Superficial layer
The superficial fatty layer of superficial fascia (Camper’s 
fascia) contains fat and varies in thickness (Figs. 4.25 and 
4.26). It is continuous over the inguinal ligament with the 
superficial fascia of the thigh and with a similar layer in 
the perineum.
Skin
Superficial fascia–
fatty layer
(Camper's fascia)
Superficial fascia–
membranous layer
(Scarpa's fascia)
External oblique muscle
Parietal peritoneum
Extraperitoneal fascia
Internal oblique muscle
Transversus
abdominis muscle
Transversalis fascia
Fig. 4.24  Layers of the abdominal wall. 

=== PAGE 284 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Wall
4
277
Fig. 4.25  Superficial fascia. 
Superficial fascia
Fatty layer
(Camper's fascia)
Membranous layer
(Scarpa's fascia)
Skin
Pubic symphysis
Penis
Dartos fascia
Scrotum
Inguinal ligament
Aponeurosis of 
external oblique
Fascia lata of thigh
Fig. 4.26  Continuity of membranous layer of superficial fascia into other areas. 
Continuity with superficial
penile fascia
Continuity with
dartos fascia
External oblique muscle
and aponeurosis
Membranous layer of
superficial fascia 
(Scarpa's fascia)
Attachment to fascia lata
Superficial perineal
fascia (Colles' fascia)
Attachment to
ischiopubic rami

=== PAGE 285 ===
Abdomen
278
Fig. 4.27  External oblique muscle and its aponeurosis. 
Linea alba
Latissimus dorsi muscle
External oblique muscle
Abdominal part of
pectoralis major muscle
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Inguinal ligament
Anterior superior iliac spine
sides of the penis to form the fundiform ligament of  
penis. In women, the membranous layer of the superficial 
fascia continues into the labia majora and the anterior part 
of the perineum.
Anterolateral muscles
There are five muscles in the anterolateral group of 
abdominal wall muscles:
■	 three flat muscles whose fibers begin posterolaterally, 
pass anteriorly, and are replaced by an aponeurosis as 
the muscle continues toward the midline—the external 
oblique, internal oblique, and transversus abdominis 
muscles;
■	 two vertical muscles, near the midline, which are 
enclosed within a tendinous sheath formed by the apo­
neuroses of the flat muscles—the rectus abdominis and 
pyramidalis muscles.
Each of these five muscles has specific actions, but 
together the muscles are critical for the maintenance of 
many normal physiological functions. By their positioning, 
they form a firm, but flexible, wall that keeps the abdominal 
viscera within the abdominal cavity, protects the viscera 
from injury, and helps maintain the position of the viscera 
in the erect posture against the action of gravity.
In addition, contraction of these muscles assists in both 
quiet and forced expiration by pushing the viscera upward 
(which helps push the relaxed diaphragm further into the 
thoracic cavity) and in coughing and vomiting.
All these muscles are also involved in any action that 
increases intraabdominal pressure, including parturition 
(childbirth), micturition (urination), and defecation 
(expulsion of feces from the rectum).
Flat muscles
External oblique
The most superficial of the three flat muscles in the antero­
lateral group of abdominal wall muscles is the external 
oblique, which is immediately deep to the superficial 
fascia (Fig. 4.27, Table 4.1). Its laterally placed muscle 
fibers pass in an inferomedial direction, while its large 

=== PAGE 286 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Wall
4
279
Fig. 4.28  Ligaments formed from the external oblique 
aponeurosis. 
External oblique 
Aponeurosis of
external oblique
Femoral artery and vein
Inguinal ligament
Lacunar ligament
Pubic tubercle
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Fig. 4.29  Ligaments of the inguinal region. 
Inguinal ligament
Anterior superior iliac spine
Pectineal line
Pectineal ligament
Lacunar ligament
Pubic symphysis
Pubic tubercle
aponeurotic component covers the anterior part of the 
abdominal wall to the midline. Approaching the midline, 
the aponeuroses are entwined, forming the linea alba, 
which extends from the xiphoid process to the pubic 
symphysis.
Associated ligaments
The lower border of the external oblique aponeurosis forms 
the inguinal ligament on each side (Fig. 4.27). This 
thickened reinforced free edge of the external oblique apo­
neurosis passes between the anterior superior iliac spine 
laterally and the pubic tubercle medially (Fig. 4.28). It folds 
under itself forming a trough, which plays an important 
role in the formation of the inguinal canal.
Several other ligaments are also formed from extensions 
of the fibers at the medial end of the inguinal ligament:
■	 The lacunar ligament is a crescent-shaped extension 
of fibers at the medial end of the inguinal ligament that 
pass backward to attach to the pecten pubis on the 
superior ramus of the pubic bone (Figs. 4.28 and 4.29).
■	 Additional fibers extend from the lacunar ligament 
along the pecten pubis of the pelvic brim to form the 
pectineal (Cooper’s) ligament.

=== PAGE 287 ===
Abdomen
280
Fig. 4.30  Internal oblique muscle and its aponeurosis. 
External oblique muscle
Rib X
Internal oblique muscle
and aponeurosis
Linea alba
External oblique muscle
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Anterior superior iliac spine
Internal oblique
Deep to the external oblique muscle is the internal 
oblique muscle, which is the second of the three flat 
muscles (Fig. 4.30, Table 4.1). This muscle is smaller and 
thinner than the external oblique, with most of its muscle 
fibers passing in a superomedial direction. Its lateral mus­
cular components end anteriorly as an aponeurosis that 
blends into the linea alba at the midline.
Transversus abdominis
Deep to the internal oblique muscle is the transversus 
abdominis muscle (Fig. 4.31, Table 4.1), so named 
because of the direction of most of its muscle fibers. It ends 
in an anterior aponeurosis, which blends with the linea 
alba at the midline.

=== PAGE 288 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Wall
4
281
Fig. 4.31  Transversus abdominis muscle and its aponeurosis. 
External oblique muscle
Rib X
Transversus abdominis
muscle and aponeurosis
Linea alba
External oblique muscle
Aponeurosis of internal oblique
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Anterior superior iliac spine
Transversalis fascia
Each of the three flat muscles is covered on its anterior and 
posterior surfaces by a layer of deep (or investing) fascia. 
In general, these layers are unremarkable except for the 
layer deep to the transversus abdominis muscle (the trans­
versalis fascia), which is better developed.
The transversalis fascia is a continuous layer of deep 
fascia that lines the abdominal cavity and continues into 
the pelvic cavity. It crosses the midline anteriorly, associat­
ing with the transversalis fascia of the opposite side, and is 
continuous with the fascia on the inferior surface of the 
diaphragm. It is continuous posteriorly with the deep fascia 
covering the muscles of the posterior abdominal wall and 
attaches to the thoracolumbar fascia.
After attaching to the crest of the ilium, the transversalis 
fascia blends with the fascia covering the muscles associ­
ated with the upper regions of the pelvic bones and with 
similar fascia covering the muscles of the pelvic cavity. At 
this point, it is referred to as the parietal pelvic (or endo­
pelvic) fascia.
There is therefore a continuous layer of deep fascia sur­
rounding the abdominal cavity that is thick in some areas, 
thin in others, attached or free, and participates in the 
formation of specialized structures.

=== PAGE 289 ===
Abdomen
282
Fig. 4.32  Rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles. 
External oblique muscle
Posterior wall of rectus sheath
Rectus abdominis muscle
Tendinous intersection
Internal oblique muscle 
Arcuate line
Transversalis fascia
Linea alba
Pyramidalis muscle
Table 4.1  Abdominal wall muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
External oblique
Muscular slips from the outer 
surfaces of the lower eight 
ribs (ribs V to XII)
Lateral lip of iliac crest; 
aponeurosis ending in 
midline raphe (linea alba)
Anterior rami of lower six 
thoracic spinal nerves (T7 
to T12)
Compress abdominal contents; 
both muscles flex trunk; each 
muscle bends trunk to same 
side, turning anterior part of 
abdomen to opposite side
Internal oblique
Thoracolumbar fascia; iliac 
crest between origins of 
external and transversus; 
lateral two-thirds of inguinal 
ligament
Inferior border of the 
lower three or four ribs; 
aponeurosis ending in 
linea alba; pubic crest and 
pectineal line
Anterior rami of lower six 
thoracic spinal nerves (T7 
to T12) and L1
Compress abdominal contents; 
both muscles flex trunk; each 
muscle bends trunk and turns 
anterior part of abdomen to 
same side
Transversus 
abdominis
Thoracolumbar fascia; medial 
lip of iliac crest; lateral 
one-third of inguinal ligament; 
costal cartilages lower six ribs 
(ribs VII to XII)
Aponeurosis ending in 
linea alba; pubic crest and 
pectineal line
Anterior rami of lower six 
thoracic spinal nerves (T7 
to T12) and L1
Compress abdominal contents
Rectus abdominis
Pubic crest, pubic tubercle, 
and pubic symphysis
Costal cartilages of ribs V 
to VII; xiphoid process
Anterior rami of lower 
seven thoracic spinal 
nerves (T7 to T12)
Compress abdominal contents; 
flex vertebral column; tense 
abdominal wall
Pyramidalis
Front of pubis and pubic 
symphysis
Into linea alba
Anterior ramus of T12
Tenses the linea alba
Vertical muscles
The two vertical muscles in the anterolateral group of 
abdominal wall muscles are the large rectus abdominis and 
the small pyramidalis (Fig. 4.32, Table 4.1).
Rectus abdominis
The rectus abdominis is a long, flat muscle and extends 
the length of the anterior abdominal wall. It is a paired 
muscle, separated in the midline by the linea alba, and it 

=== PAGE 290 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Wall
4
283
Fig. 4.33  Organization of the rectus sheath. A. Transverse section through the upper three-quarters of the rectus sheath. B. Transverse section 
through the lower one-quarter of the rectus sheath. 
External oblique
A
B
External oblique
Internal oblique
Transversus abdominis
Linea alba
Rectus abdominis
Linea alba
Rectus abdominis
Parietal peritoneum
Transversalis fascia
Parietal peritoneum
Transversalis fascia
Internal oblique
Transversus abdominis
widens and thins as it ascends from the pubic symphysis to 
the costal margin. Along its course, it is intersected by 
three or four transverse fibrous bands or tendinous inter­
sections (Fig. 4.32). These are easily visible on individuals 
with well-developed rectus abdominis muscles.
Pyramidalis
The second vertical muscle is the pyramidalis. This small, 
triangular muscle, which may be absent, is anterior to 
the rectus abdominis and has its base on the pubis, and its 
apex is attached superiorly and medially to the linea alba 
(Fig. 4.32).
Rectus sheath
The rectus abdominis and pyramidalis muscles are enclosed 
in an aponeurotic tendinous sheath (the rectus sheath) 
formed by a unique layering of the aponeuroses of the 
external and internal oblique, and transversus abdominis 
muscles (Fig. 4.33).
The rectus sheath completely encloses the upper three-
quarters of the rectus abdominis and covers the anterior 
surface of the lower one-quarter of the muscle. As no 
sheath covers the posterior surface of the lower quarter of 
the rectus abdominis muscle, the muscle at this point is in 
direct contact with the transversalis fascia.
The formation of the rectus sheath surrounding the 
upper three-quarters of the rectus abdominis muscle has 
the following pattern:
■	 The anterior wall consists of the aponeurosis of the 
external oblique and half of the aponeurosis of the 
internal oblique, which splits at the lateral margin of 
the rectus abdominis.
■	 The posterior wall of the rectus sheath consists of the 
other half of the aponeurosis of the internal oblique 
and the aponeurosis of the transversus abdominis.
At a point midway between the umbilicus and the pubic 
symphysis, corresponding to the beginning of the lower 
one-quarter of the rectus abdominis muscle, all of the 
aponeuroses move anterior to the rectus muscle. There is 
no posterior wall of the rectus sheath and the anterior wall 
of the sheath consists of the aponeuroses of the external 
oblique, the internal oblique, and the transversus abdomi­
nis muscles. From this point inferiorly, the rectus abdominis 
muscle is in direct contact with the transversalis fascia. 
Marking this point of transition is an arch of fibers (the 
arcuate line; see Fig. 4.32).

=== PAGE 291 ===
Abdomen
284
Extraperitoneal fascia
Deep to the transversalis fascia is a layer of connective 
tissue, the extraperitoneal fascia, which separates the 
transversalis fascia from the peritoneum (Fig. 4.34). Con­
taining varying amounts of fat, this layer not only lines the 
abdominal cavity but is also continuous with a similar 
layer lining the pelvic cavity. It is abundant on the posterior 
abdominal wall, especially around the kidneys, continues 
over organs covered by peritoneal reflections, and, as the 
vasculature is located in this layer, extends into mesenter­
ies with the blood vessels. Viscera in the extraperitoneal 
fascia are referred to as retroperitoneal.
In the description of specific surgical procedures, the 
terminology used to describe the extraperitoneal fascia is 
further modified. The fascia toward the anterior side of the 
body is described as preperitoneal (or, less commonly, pro­
peritoneal) and the fascia toward the posterior side of the 
body has been described as retroperitoneal (Fig. 4.35). 
Fig. 4.34  Transverse section showing the layers of the abdominal wall. 
Transversalis fascia
Extraperitoneal fascia
Visceral peritoneum
Parietal peritoneum
Transversus abdominis muscle
Internal oblique muscle
External oblique muscle
Aponeuroses
Superficial fascia
Fatty layer
(Camper's)
Membranous layer
(Scarpa's)
Skin
Examples of the use of these terms would be the continuity 
of fat in the inguinal canal with the preperitoneal fat and 
a transabdominal preperitoneal laparoscopic repair of an 
inguinal hernia.
Peritoneum
Deep to the extraperitoneal fascia is the peritoneum (see 
Figs. 4.6 and 4.7 on pp. 260-261). This thin serous mem­
brane lines the walls of the abdominal cavity and, at 
various points, reflects onto the abdominal viscera, provid­
ing either a complete or a partial covering. The peritoneum 
lining the walls is the parietal peritoneum; the peritoneum 
covering the viscera is the visceral peritoneum.
The continuous lining of the abdominal walls by the 
parietal peritoneum forms a sac. This sac is closed in men 
but has two openings in women where the uterine tubes 
provide a passage to the outside. The closed sac in men and 
the semiclosed sac in women is called the peritoneal cavity.

=== PAGE 292 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Wall
4
285
Fig. 4.35  Subdivisions of the extraperitoneal fascia. 
Retroperitoneal
Extraperitoneal fascia
Preperitoneal
Fig. 4.36  Innervation of the anterolateral abdominal wall. 
External oblique muscle
and aponeurosis
Iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Xiphoid process
Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)
Iliac crest
Anterior cutaneous
branches T7 to T12
Lateral cutaneous
branches T7 to T12
Innervation
The skin, muscles, and parietal peritoneum of the antero­
lateral abdominal wall are supplied by T7 to T12 and L1 
spinal nerves. The anterior rami of these spinal nerves pass 
around the body, from posterior to anterior, in an infero­
medial direction (Fig. 4.36). As they proceed, they give off 
a lateral cutaneous branch and end as an anterior cutane­
ous branch.
The intercostal nerves (T7 to T11) leave their intercostal 
spaces, passing deep to the costal cartilages, and continue 
onto the anterolateral abdominal wall between the internal 
oblique and transversus abdominis muscles (Fig. 4.37). 
Reaching the lateral edge of the rectus sheath, they enter 
the rectus sheath and pass posterior to the lateral aspect 
of the rectus abdominis muscle. Approaching the midline, 
an anterior cutaneous branch passes through the rectus 
abdominis muscle and the anterior wall of the rectus 
sheath to supply the skin.

=== PAGE 293 ===
Abdomen
286
Spinal nerve T12 (the subcostal nerve) follows a 
similar course as the intercostals. Branches of L1 (the 
iliohypogastric nerve and ilio-inguinal nerve), which 
originate from the lumbar plexus, follow similar courses 
initially, but deviate from this pattern near their final 
destination.
Along their course, nerves T7 to T12 and L1 supply 
branches to the anterolateral abdominal wall muscles 
and the underlying parietal peritoneum. All terminate by 
supplying skin:
■	 Nerves T7 to T9 supply the skin from the xiphoid process 
to just above the umbilicus.
■	 T10 supplies the skin around the umbilicus.
■	 T11, T12, and L1 supply the skin from just below 
the umbilicus to, and including, the pubic region 
(Fig. 4.38).
■	 Additionally, the ilio-inguinal nerve (a branch of 
L1) supplies the anterior surface of the scrotum or 
labia majora, and sends a small cutaneous branch to 
the thigh.
Fig. 4.37  Path taken by the nerves innervating the anterolateral abdominal wall. 
Linea alba
Rectus abdominis muscle
Transversus abdominis muscle
Iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)
T12 nerve
T10 nerve
Fig. 4.38  Dermatomes of the anterolateral abdominal wall. 
T10
T9
T8
T7
T11
T12
L1

=== PAGE 295 ===
Abdomen
288
■	 Deep lymphatic drainage follows the deep arteries back 
to parasternal nodes along the internal thoracic 
artery, lumbar nodes along the abdominal aorta, and 
external iliac nodes along the external iliac artery.
GROIN
The groin (inguinal region) is the area of junction between 
the anterior abdominal wall and the thigh. In this area, the 
abdominal wall is weakened from changes that occur 
during development and a peritoneal sac or diverticulum, 
with or without abdominal contents, can therefore pro­
trude through it, creating an inguinal hernia. This type 
of hernia can occur in both sexes, but it is most common 
in males.
The superior and inferior epigastric arteries both enter 
the rectus sheath. They are posterior to the rectus abdomi­
nis muscle throughout their course, and anastomose with 
each other (Fig. 4.40).
Veins of similar names follow the arteries and are 
responsible for venous drainage.
Lymphatic drainage
Lymphatic drainage of the anterolateral abdominal wall 
follows the basic principles of lymphatic drainage:
■	 Superficial lymphatics above the umbilicus pass in a 
superior direction to the axillary nodes, while drain­
age below the umbilicus passes in an inferior direction 
to the superficial inguinal nodes.
Fig. 4.40  Superior and inferior epigastric arteries. 
Internal thoracic artery
Superior epigastric artery
Musculophrenic artery
Inferior epigastric artery
Deep circumflex iliac artery
Transversus abdominis muscle
Rectus abdominis muscle

=== PAGE 296 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
289
Fig. 4.41  Descent of the testis from week 7 (postfertilization) to birth. 
Extraperitoneal fascia
Transversalis fascia
Transversus abdominis muscle
Internal oblique muscle
External oblique muscle
Testis
Gubernaculum
Processus vaginalis
Parietal peritoneum
The inherent weakness in the anterior abdominal wall 
in the groin is caused by changes that occur during the 
development of the gonads. Before the descent of the testes 
and ovaries from their initial position high in the posterior 
abdominal wall, a peritoneal outpouching (the processus 
vaginalis) forms (Fig. 4.41), protruding through the 
various layers of the anterior abdominal wall and acquir­
ing coverings from each:
■	 The transversalis fascia forms its deepest covering.
■	 The second covering is formed by the musculature of 
the internal oblique (a covering from the transversus 
abdominis muscle is not acquired because the processus 
vaginalis passes under the arching fibers of this abdomi­
nal wall muscle).
■	 Its most superficial covering is the aponeurosis of the 
external oblique.
As a result the processus vaginalis is transformed into a 
tubular structure with multiple coverings from the layers 
of the anterior abdominal wall. This forms the basic struc­
ture of the inguinal canal.
The final event in this development is the descent of 
the testes into the scrotum or of the ovaries into the 
pelvic cavity. This process depends on the development 
of the gubernaculum, which extends from the inferior 
border of the developing gonad to the labioscrotal swellings 
(Fig. 4.41).
The processus vaginalis is immediately anterior to the 
gubernaculum within the inguinal canal.
In men, as the testes descend, the testes and their 
accompanying vessels, ducts, and nerves pass through the 
inguinal canal and are therefore surrounded by the same 
fascial layers of the abdominal wall. Testicular descent 
completes the formation of the spermatic cord in men.

=== PAGE 297 ===
Abdomen
290
deep inguinal ring and continues for approximately 4 cm, 
ending at the superficial inguinal ring (Fig. 4.42). The 
contents of the canal are the genital branch of the geni­
tofemoral nerve, the spermatic cord in men, and the 
round ligament of  the uterus in women. Additionally, 
in both sexes, the ilio-inguinal nerve passes through part 
of the canal, exiting through the superficial inguinal ring 
with the other contents.
Deep inguinal ring
The deep (internal) inguinal ring is the beginning of the 
inguinal canal and is at a point midway between the ante­
rior superior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis (Fig. 
4.43). It is just above the inguinal ligament and immedi­
ately lateral to the inferior epigastric vessels. Although 
sometimes referred to as a defect or opening in the trans­
versalis fascia, it is actually the beginning of the tubular 
evagination of transversalis fascia that forms one of the 
coverings (the internal spermatic fascia) of the sper­
matic cord in men or the round ligament of the uterus in 
women.
In women, the ovaries descend into the pelvic cavity and 
become associated with the developing uterus. Therefore, 
the only remaining structure passing through the inguinal 
canal is the round ligament of the uterus, which is a 
remnant of the gubernaculum.
The development sequence is concluded in both sexes 
when the processus vaginalis obliterates. If this does not 
occur or is incomplete, a potential weakness exists in the 
anterior abdominal wall and an inguinal hernia may 
develop. In males, only proximal regions of the processus 
vaginalis obliterate. The distal end expands to enclose most 
of the testis in the scrotum. In other words, the cavity of  
the tunica vaginalis in men forms as an extension of the 
developing peritoneal cavity that becomes separated off 
during development.
Inguinal canal
The inguinal canal is a slit-like passage that extends in a 
downward and medial direction, just above and parallel to 
the lower half of the inguinal ligament. It begins at the 
Fig. 4.42  Inguinal canal. 
Linea alba
Superficial
inguinal ring
Deep inguinal ring
External oblique muscle
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Inguinal ligament
Spermatic cord
Anterior superior
iliac spine

=== PAGE 298 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
291
Fig. 4.43  Deep inguinal ring and the transversalis fascia. 
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery and vein
Transversalis fascia
Inferior epigastric artery
Pubic symphysis
Spermatic
cord
Deep inguinal ring
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Fig. 4.44  Superficial inguinal ring and the aponeurosis of the external oblique. 
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery and vein
External oblique muscle
Aponeurosis of external oblique 
Spermatic cord
Superficial inguinal ring
Anterior superior iliac spine
Superficial inguinal ring
The superficial (external) inguinal ring is the end of the 
inguinal canal and is superior to the pubic tubercle (Fig. 
4.44). It is a triangular opening in the aponeurosis of the 
external oblique, with its apex pointing superolaterally and 
its base formed by the pubic crest. The two remaining sides 
of the triangle (the medial crus and the lateral crus) are 
attached to the pubic symphysis and the pubic tubercle, 
respectively. At the apex of the triangle the two crura are 
held together by crossing (intercrural) fibers, which prevent 
further widening of the superficial ring.
As with the deep inguinal ring, the superficial inguinal 
ring is actually the beginning of the tubular evagination 
of the aponeurosis of the external oblique onto the struc­
tures traversing the inguinal canal and emerging from the 
superficial inguinal ring. This continuation of tissue over 
the spermatic cord is the external spermatic fascia.

=== PAGE 299 ===
Abdomen
292
Fig. 4.45  Internal oblique muscle and the inguinal canal. 
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery and vein
Internal oblique muscle
Aponeurosis of internal oblique 
Spermatic cord
Conjoint tendon
Anterior superior iliac spine
Anterior wall
The anterior wall of the inguinal canal is formed along its 
entire length by the aponeurosis of the external oblique 
muscle (Fig. 4.44). It is also reinforced laterally by the 
lower fibers of the internal oblique that originate from the 
lateral two-thirds of the inguinal ligament (Fig. 4.45). This 
adds an additional covering over the deep inguinal ring, 
which is a potential point of weakness in the anterior 
abdominal wall. Furthermore, as the internal oblique 
muscle covers the deep inguinal ring, it also contributes a 
layer (the cremasteric fascia containing the cremas­
teric muscle) to the coverings of the structures traversing 
the inguinal canal.
Posterior wall
The posterior wall of the inguinal canal is formed along 
its entire length by the transversalis fascia (see Fig. 4.43). 
It is reinforced along its medial one-third by the conjoint 
tendon (inguinal falx; Fig. 4.45). This tendon is the com­
bined insertion of the transversus abdominis and internal 
oblique muscles into the pubic crest and pectineal line.
As with the internal oblique muscle’s reinforcement of 
the area of the deep inguinal ring, the position of the 
conjoint tendon posterior to the superficial inguinal ring 
provides additional support to a potential point of weak­
ness in the anterior abdominal wall.
Roof
The roof (superior wall) of the inguinal canal is formed by 
the arching fibers of the transversus abdominis and inter­
nal oblique muscles (Figs. 4.45 and 4.46). They pass from 
their lateral points of origin from the inguinal ligament to 
their common medial attachment as the conjoint tendon.
Floor
The floor (inferior wall) of the inguinal canal is formed by 
the medial one-half of the inguinal ligament. This rolled-
under, free margin of the lowest part of the aponeurosis of 
the external oblique forms a gutter or trough on which the 
contents of the inguinal canal are positioned. The lacunar 
ligament reinforces most of the medial part of the gutter.
Contents
The contents of the inguinal canal are:
■	 the spermatic cord in men, and
■	 the round ligament of the uterus and genital branch of 
the genitofemoral nerve in women.

=== PAGE 300 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
293
■	 the testicular artery (from the abdominal aorta),
■	 the pampiniform plexus of veins (testicular veins),
■	 the cremasteric artery and vein (small vessels associated 
with the cremasteric fascia),
■	 the genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve (innerva­
tion to the cremasteric muscle),
■	 sympathetic and visceral afferent nerve fibers,
■	 lymphatics, and
■	 remnants of the processus vaginalis.
These structures enter the deep inguinal ring, proceed 
down the inguinal canal, and exit from the superficial 
inguinal ring, having acquired the three fascial coverings 
during their journey. This collection of structures and 
fascias continues into the scrotum where the structures 
connect with the testes and the fascias surround the testes.
Three fascias enclose the contents of the spermatic cord:
■	 The internal spermatic fascia, which is the deepest layer, 
arises from the transversalis fascia and is attached to the 
margins of the deep inguinal ring.
■	 The cremasteric fascia with the associated cremasteric 
muscle, which is the middle fascial layer, arises from the 
internal oblique muscle.
■	 The external spermatic fascia, which is the most super­
ficial covering of the spermatic cord, arises from the 
aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle and is 
attached to the margins of the superficial inguinal ring 
(Fig. 4.47A).
Round ligament of the uterus
The round ligament of the uterus is a cord-like structure 
that passes from the uterus to the deep inguinal ring where 
it enters the inguinal canal (Fig. 4.47B). It passes down the 
inguinal canal and exits through the superficial inguinal 
ring. At this point, it has changed from a cord-like structure 
to a few strands of tissue, which attach to the connective 
tissue associated with the labia majora. As it traverses the 
inguinal canal, it acquires the same coverings as the sper­
matic cord in men. As the round ligament exits the super­
ficial inguinal ring, the coverings are indistinguishable 
from the tissue strands of the ligament itself.
The round ligament of the uterus is the long distal part 
of the original gubernaculum in the fetus that extends from 
the ovary to the labioscrotal swellings. From its attachment 
to the uterus, the round ligament of the uterus continues 
to the ovary as the ligament of the ovary that develops 
from the short proximal end of the gubernaculum.
These structures enter the inguinal canal through the 
deep inguinal ring and exit it through the superficial ingui­
nal ring.
Additionally, the ilio-inguinal nerve (L1) passes through 
part of the inguinal canal. This nerve is a branch of the 
lumbar plexus, enters the abdominal wall posteriorly by 
piercing the internal surface of the transversus abdominis 
muscle, and continues through the layers of the anterior 
abdominal wall by piercing the internal oblique muscle. As 
it continues to pass inferomedially, it enters the inguinal 
canal. It continues down the canal to exit through the 
superficial inguinal ring.
Spermatic cord
The spermatic cord begins to form proximally at the deep 
inguinal ring and consists of structures passing between 
the abdominopelvic cavities and the testis, and the three 
fascial coverings that enclose these structures (Fig. 4.47).
The structures in the spermatic cord include:
■	 the ductus deferens,
■	 the artery to the ductus deferens (from the inferior 
vesical artery),
Fig. 4.46  Transversus abdominis muscle and the inguinal canal. 
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery and vein
Transversus abdominis muscle
Aponeurosis of
transversus abdominis 
Spermatic cord
Anterior superior
iliac spine

=== PAGE 301 ===
Abdomen
294
Fig. 4.47  A. Spermatic cord (men). 
Internal spermatic fascia
Parietal layer of the tunica vaginalis
A
Visceral layer of the tunica vaginalis
Cavity of the tunica vaginalis
External spermatic fascia
Cremasteric fascia
Deep inguinal ring
Internal
oblique muscle
Superficial inguinal ring
Testicular artery and
pampiniform plexus of veins
Parietal peritoneum
Artery to ductus deferens
Cremasteric vessels
Genital branch of genitofemoral nerve
Inferior epigastric vessels
Ductus deferens
External oblique
aponeurosis
Transversus
abdominis muscle
Conjoint tendon
External oblique
aponeurosis
Transversalis
fascia
Ilioinguinal
nerve
Ilioinguinal nerve
Extraperitoneal fascia

=== PAGE 302 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
295
Fig. 4.47, cont’d.  B. Round ligament of uterus (women). 
Internal
oblique muscle
Parietal peritoneum
Genital branch of
genitofemoral nerve
Genital branch of
genitofemoral nerve
Inferior epigastric vessels
Round ligament of uterus
External oblique
aponeurosis
Transversus
abdominis muscle
Membranous layer
of superficial fascia
Superficial fascia
(fatty layers)   
Fine connective
tissue strands
B
Conjoint tendon
External oblique
aponeurosis
Skin of mons pubis
Ilioinguinal
nerve
Ilioinguinal nerve
Extraperitoneal fascia

=== PAGE 303 ===
Abdomen
296
part, or all, of the embryonic processus vaginalis remains 
open or patent. It is therefore referred to as being congenital 
in origin.
The protruding peritoneal sac enters the inguinal canal 
by passing through the deep inguinal ring, just lateral to 
the inferior epigastric vessels. The extent of its excursion 
down the inguinal canal depends on the amount of proces­
sus vaginalis that remains patent. If the entire processus 
vaginalis remains patent, the peritoneal sac may traverse 
the length of the canal, exit the superficial inguinal ring, 
and continue into the scrotum in men or the labia majus 
in women. In this case, the protruding peritoneal sac 
acquires the same three coverings as those associated with 
the spermatic cord in men or the round ligament of the 
uterus in women.
Inguinal hernias
An inguinal hernia is the protrusion or passage of a peri­
toneal sac, with or without abdominal contents, through 
a weakened part of the abdominal wall in the groin. It 
occurs because the peritoneal sac enters the inguinal 
canal either:
■	 indirectly, through the deep inguinal ring, or
■	 directly, through the posterior wall of the inguinal 
canal.
Inguinal hernias are therefore classified as either indi­
rect or direct.
Indirect inguinal hernias
The indirect inguinal hernia is the most common of the 
two types of inguinal hernia and is much more common 
in men than in women (Fig. 4.48). It occurs because some 
In the clinic
Cremasteric reflex
In men, the cremaster muscle and cremasteric fascia form 
the middle or second covering of the spermatic cord. This 
muscle and its associated fascia are supplied by the 
genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve (L1/L2). 
Contraction of this muscle and the resulting elevation of 
the testis can be stimulated by a reflex arc. Gently 
touching the skin at and around the anterior aspect of the 
superior part of the thigh stimulates the sensory fibers in 
the ilio-inguinal nerve. These sensory fibers enter the 
spinal cord at level L1. At this level, the sensory fibers 
stimulate the motor fibers carried in the genital branch of 
the genitofemoral nerve, which results in contraction of 
the cremaster muscle and elevation of the testis.
The cremasteric reflex is more active in children, 
tending to diminish with age. As with many reflexes, it 
may be absent in certain neurological disorders. Although 
it can be used for testing spinal cord function at level L1 in 
men, its clinical use is limited.
Fig. 4.48  Indirect inguinal hernia. 
Deep inguinal ring
Superficial inguinal ring
Peritoneal sac
Testis
Parietal peritoneum
Inferior epigastric vessels
Extraperitoneal fascia
Conjoint tendon

=== PAGE 304 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
297
Direct inguinal hernias
A peritoneal sac that enters the medial end of the inguinal 
canal directly through a weakened posterior wall is a direct 
inguinal hernia (Fig. 4.49). It is usually described as 
acquired because it develops when abdominal musculature 
has been weakened, and is commonly seen in mature men. 
The bulging occurs medial to the inferior epigastric vessels 
in the inguinal triangle (Hesselbach’s triangle), which is 
bounded:
■	 laterally by the inferior epigastric artery,
■	 medially by the rectus abdominis muscle, and
■	 inferiorly by the inguinal ligament (Fig. 4.50).
Internally, a thickening of the transversalis fascia (the 
iliopubic tract) follows the course of the inguinal ligament 
(Fig. 4.50).
A direct inguinal hernia does not traverse the entire 
length of the inguinal canal but may exit through the 
superficial inguinal ring. When this occurs, the peritoneal 
sac acquires a layer of external spermatic fascia and can 
extend, like an indirect hernia, into the scrotum.
Fig. 4.50  Right inguinal triangle. A. Internal view. 
Deep inguinal ring
Superficial inguinal ring
Inferior epigastric vessels
Testicular vessels
Rectus abdominis muscle
Lacunar ligament
Inguinal triangle
Iliopubic tract
Anterior superior iliac spine
External iliac artery
External iliac vein
Ductus deferens
Transversus abdominis muscle
A
Fig. 4.49  Direct inguinal hernia. 
Deep inguinal ring
Superficial inguinal ring
Peritoneal bulge
Testis
Parietal peritoneum
Inferior epigastric vessels
Extraperitoneal
fascia
Conjoint tendon

=== PAGE 305 ===
Abdomen
298
Inferior epigastric
vessels
Direct hernia
Testicular vessels
Position of deep
inguinal ring
B
Lateral
Medial
External iliac vessels
Ductus deferens
B. Laparoscopic view showing the parietal peritoneum still covering the area. 
Fig. 4.50, cont’d
In the clinic
Masses around the groin
Around the groin there is a complex confluence of 
anatomical structures. Careful examination and good 
anatomical knowledge allow determination of the correct 
anatomical structure from which the mass arises and 
therefore the diagnosis. The most common masses in the 
groin are hernias.
The key to groin examination is determining the position 
of the inguinal ligament. The inguinal ligament passes 
between the anterior superior iliac spine laterally and the 
pubic tubercle medially. Inguinal hernias are above the 
inguinal ligament and are usually more apparent on 
standing. A visual assessment of the lump is necessary, 
bearing in mind the anatomical landmarks of the inguinal 
ligament.
In men, it is wise to examine the scrotum to check for a 
lump. If an abnormal mass is present, an inability to feel its 
upper edge suggests that it may originate from the inguinal 
canal and might be a hernia. By placing the hand over the 
lump and asking the patient to cough, the lump bulges 
outward.
An attempt should be made to reduce the swelling by 
applying gentle, firm pressure over the lump. If the lump is 
reducible, the hand should be withdrawn and careful 
observation will reveal recurrence of the mass.
The position of an abnormal mass in the groin relative to 
the pubic tubercle is very important, as are the presence of 
increased temperature and pain, which may represent early 
signs of strangulation or infection.
As a general rule:
■	 An inguinal hernia appears through the superficial 
inguinal ring above the pubic tubercle and crest.
■	 A femoral hernia (see below) appears through the 
femoral canal below and lateral to the pubic tubercle.
A hernia is the protrusion of a viscus, in part or in whole, 
through a normal or abnormal opening. The viscus usually 
carries a covering of parietal peritoneum, which forms the 
lining of the hernial sac.
Inguinal hernias
Hernias occur in a variety of regions. The commonest site is 
the groin of the lower anterior abdominal wall. In some 
patients, inguinal hernias are present from birth (congenital) 
and are caused by the persistence of the processus vaginalis 
and the passage of viscera through the inguinal canal. 
Acquired hernias occur in older patients and causes include 
raised intraabdominal pressure (e.g., from repeated coughing 
associated with lung disease), damage to nerves of the 
anterior abdominal wall (e.g., from surgical abdominal 
incisions), and weakening of the walls of the inguinal canal.
One of the potential problems with hernias is that bowel 
and fat may become stuck within the hernial sac. This can 
cause appreciable pain and bowel obstruction, necessitating 
urgent surgery. Another potential risk is strangulation of the 
hernia, in which the blood supply to the bowel is cut off at 
the neck of the hernial sac, rendering the bowel ischemic 
and susceptible to perforation (Fig. 4.51).
The hernial sac of an indirect inguinal hernia enters the 
deep inguinal ring and passes through the inguinal canal. If 
the hernia is large enough, the hernial sac may emerge 
through the superficial inguinal ring. In men, such a hernia 
may extend into the scrotum (Fig. 4.52).
The hernial sac of a direct inguinal hernia pushes forward 
through the posterior wall of the inguinal canal immediately 

=== PAGE 306 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Groin
4
299
posterior to the superficial inguinal ring. The hernia 
protrudes directly forward medial to the inferior epigastric 
vessels and through the superficial inguinal ring.
The differentiation between an indirect and a direct 
inguinal hernia is made during surgery when the inferior 
epigastric vessels are identified at the medial edge of the 
deep internal ring:
■	 An indirect hernial sac passes lateral to the inferior 
epigastric vessels.
■	 A direct hernia is medial to the inferior epigastric 
vessels.
Inguinal hernias occur more commonly in men than in 
women possibly because men have a much larger inguinal 
canal than women.
Femoral hernias
A femoral hernia passes through the femoral canal and into 
the medial aspect of the anterior thigh. The femoral canal 
lies at the medial edge of the femoral sheath, which 
contains the femoral artery, femoral vein, and lymphatics. 
The neck of the femoral canal is extremely narrow and is 
prone to trapping bowel within the sac, so making this type 
of hernia irreducible and susceptible to bowel strangulation. 
Femoral hernias are usually acquired, are not congenital, and 
most commonly occur in middle-aged and elderly 
populations. In addition, because women generally have 
wider pelvises than men, they tend to occur more 
commonly in women.
Sportsmen’s groin/sportsmen’s hernia
The groin can loosely be defined as the area where the leg 
meets the trunk near the midline. Here the abdominal 
muscles of the trunk blend in with the adductor muscles of 
the thigh, the medial end of the inguinal ligament attaches 
to the pubic tubercle, the pubic symphysis attaches the two 
pubic bones together, and the superficial (external) inguinal 
ring occurs. It also is in and around this region where there 
is considerable translation of force during most athletic and 
sporting activities. Pain in the groin or pubic region can be 
due to numerous causes, which include inflammatory 
changes at the pubic symphysis, insertional problems of the 
rectus abdominis/adductor longus, and hernias.
In the clinic—cont’d
Fig. 4.51  Coronal CT shows a large inguinal hernia containing 
loops of large and small bowel (arrow) on the left side of a male 
patient. 
Fig. 4.52  Right indirect inguinal hernia. T2, fat saturated, 
weighted magnetic resonance image in the coronal plane of 
a male groin. 
Right indirect
 inguinal hernia
Corpora cavernosa
Corpus spongiosum
Left testis
Right testis
(continues)

=== PAGE 308 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
301
continuous with the greater sac through an opening, 
the omental (epiploic) foramen (Fig. 4.55).
Surrounding the omental (epiploic) foramen are numer­
ous structures covered with peritoneum. They include the 
portal vein, hepatic artery proper, and bile duct anteriorly; 
the inferior vena cava posteriorly; the caudate lobe of 
the liver superiorly; and the first part of the duodenum 
inferiorly.
Peritoneal cavity
The peritoneal cavity is subdivided into the greater sac and 
the omental bursa (lesser sac; Fig. 4.54).
■	 The greater sac accounts for most of the space in 
the peritoneal cavity, beginning superiorly at the dia­
phragm and continuing inferiorly into the pelvic cavity. 
It is entered once the parietal peritoneum has been 
penetrated.
■	 The omental bursa is a smaller subdivision of the peri­
toneal cavity posterior to the stomach and liver and is 
Fig. 4.54  Greater and lesser sacs of the peritoneal cavity. 
Diaphragm
Liver
Stomach
Greater omentum
Greater sac
Omental bursa
Lesser omentum
Pancreas
Duodenum
Transverse mesocolon
Transverse colon
Mesentery
Small intestine

=== PAGE 310 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
303
membrane for fluid and electrolyte exchange. To accomplish 
dialysis, a small tube is inserted through the abdominal wall 
and dialysis fluid is injected into the peritoneal cavity. 
Electrolytes and molecules are exchanged across the 
peritoneum between the fluid and blood. Once dialysis is 
completed, the fluid is drained.
Peritoneal spread of disease
The large surface area of the peritoneal cavity allows 
infection and malignant disease to spread easily throughout 
the abdomen (Fig. 4.57). If malignant cells enter the 
peritoneal cavity by direct invasion (e.g., from colon or 
ovarian cancer), spread may be rapid. Similarly, a surgeon 
excising a malignant tumor and releasing malignant cells 
into the peritoneal cavity may cause an appreciable 
worsening of the patient’s prognosis. Infection can also 
spread across the large surface area.
The peritoneal cavity can also act as a barrier to, and 
container of, disease. Intraabdominal infection therefore 
tends to remain below the diaphragm rather than spread 
into other body cavities.
Perforated bowel
A perforated bowel (e.g., caused by a perforated duodenal 
ulcer) often leads to the release of gas into the peritoneal 
cavity. This peritoneal gas can be easily visualized on an 
erect chest radiograph—gas can be demonstrated in 
extremely small amounts beneath the diaphragm. A patient 
with severe abdominal pain and subdiaphragmatic gas needs 
a laparotomy (Fig. 4.58).
In the clinic—cont’d
Fig. 4.57  Peritoneal metastasis on the surface of the liver. 
Computed tomogram in the axial plane of the upper abdomen. 
Peritoneal metastasis
on surface of liver
Aorta
Inferior vena cava
Liver
Spleen
Left kidney
Fig. 4.56  Coronal CT shows ascites fluid in abdominal cavity. 
Ascites
Small bowel loops
Liver
Fig. 4.58  Radiograph of subdiaphragmatic gas. 
Free air under diaphragm

=== PAGE 313 ===
Abdomen
306
vertebra SIII. The sigmoid and superior rectal vessels, along 
with the nerves and lymphatics associated with the sigmoid 
colon, pass through this peritoneal fold.
Ligaments
Peritoneal ligaments consist of two layers of peritoneum 
that connect two organs to each other or attach an organ 
to the body wall, and may form part of an omentum. They 
are usually named after the structures being connected. 
For example, the splenorenal ligament connects the left 
kidney to the spleen and the gastrophrenic ligament con­
nects the stomach to the diaphragm.
Mesenteries
Mesenteries are peritoneal folds that attach viscera to the 
posterior abdominal wall. They allow some movement and 
provide a conduit for vessels, nerves, and lymphatics to 
reach the viscera and include:
■	 the mesentery—associated with parts of the small 
intestine,
■	 the transverse mesocolon—associated with the trans­
verse colon, and
■	 the sigmoid mesocolon—associated with the sigmoid 
colon.
All of these are derivatives of the dorsal mesentery.
Mesentery
The mesentery is a large, fan-shaped, double-layered fold 
of peritoneum that connects the jejunum and ileum to the 
posterior abdominal wall (Fig. 4.61). Its superior attach­
ment is at the duodenojejunal junction, just to the left of 
the upper lumbar part of the vertebral column. It passes 
obliquely downward and to the right, ending at the ileoce­
cal junction near the upper border of the right sacro-iliac 
joint. In the fat between the two peritoneal layers of the 
mesentery are the arteries, veins, nerves, and lymphatics 
that supply the jejunum and ileum.
Transverse mesocolon
The transverse mesocolon is a fold of peritoneum that 
connects the transverse colon to the posterior abdominal 
wall (Fig. 4.61). Its two layers of peritoneum leave the 
posterior abdominal wall across the anterior surface of the 
head and body of the pancreas and pass outward to sur­
round the transverse colon. Between its layers are the 
arteries, veins, nerves, and lymphatics related to the 
transverse colon. The anterior layer of the transverse 
mesocolon is adherent to the posterior layer of the greater 
omentum.
Sigmoid mesocolon
The sigmoid mesocolon is an inverted, V-shaped perito­
neal fold that attaches the sigmoid colon to the abdominal 
wall (Fig. 4.61). The apex of the V is near the division of 
the left common iliac artery into its internal and external 
branches, with the left limb of the descending V along the 
medial border of the left psoas major muscle and the right 
limb descending into the pelvis to end at the level of 
Fig. 4.61  Peritoneal reflections, forming mesenteries, outlined on 
the posterior abdominal wall. 
Root of the transverse mesocolon
Root of the sigmoid mesocolon
Root of the mesentery

=== PAGE 314 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
307
Organs
Abdominal esophagus
The abdominal esophagus represents the short distal part 
of the esophagus located in the abdominal cavity. Emerg­
ing through the right crus of the diaphragm, usually at the 
level of vertebra TX, it passes from the esophageal hiatus 
to the cardial orifice of the stomach just left of the midline 
(Fig. 4.62).
Associated with the esophagus, as it enters the abdomi­
nal cavity, are the anterior and posterior vagal trunks:
■	 The anterior vagal trunk consists of several smaller 
trunks whose fibers mostly come from the left vagus 
nerve; rotation of the gut during development moves 
these trunks to the anterior surface of the esophagus.
■	 Similarly, the posterior vagal trunk consists of a 
single trunk whose fibers mostly come from the right 
vagus nerve, and rotational changes during develop­
ment move this trunk to the posterior surface of the 
esophagus.
Fig. 4.62  Abdominal esophagus. 
Right
vagus
nerve
Trachea
Arch of aorta
Aorta
Thoracic
esophagus
Abdominal esophagus
Right crus of
diaphragm
Left vagus nerve
Fig. 4.63  Arterial supply to the abdominal esophagus and 
stomach. 
Hepatic artery proper
Right gastro-omental artery
Left gastro-
omental artery
Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
Anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
Left gastric artery
Right gastric
artery
Short gastric arteries
Splenic artery
Gastroduodenal artery
Abdominal aorta
The arterial supply to the abdominal esophagus 
(Fig. 4.63) includes:
■	 esophageal branches from the left gastric artery (from 
the celiac trunk), and
■	 esophageal branches from the left inferior phrenic 
artery (from the abdominal aorta).
Stomach
The stomach is the most dilated part of the gastrointestinal 
tract and has a J-like shape (Figs. 4.64 and 4.65). Posi­
tioned between the abdominal esophagus and the small 
intestine, the stomach is in the epigastric, umbilical, and 
left hypochondrium regions of the abdomen.
The stomach is divided into four regions:
■	 the cardia, which surrounds the opening of the esopha­
gus into the stomach;
■	 the fundus of the stomach, which is the area above the 
level of the cardial orifice;
■	 the body of the stomach, which is the largest region of 
the stomach; and
■	 the pyloric part, which is divided into the pyloric antrum 
and pyloric canal and is the distal end of the stomach.

=== PAGE 319 ===
Abdomen
312
ileocecal fold come together at their end, forming ridges. 
Musculature from the ileum continues into each flap, 
forming a sphincter. Possible functions of the ileocecal fold 
include preventing reflux from the cecum to the ileum, and 
regulating the passage of contents from the ileum to the 
cecum.
The arterial supply to the ileum (Fig. 4.71) includes:
■	 ileal arteries from the superior mesenteric artery, and
■	 an ileal branch from the ileocolic artery (from the supe­
rior mesenteric artery).
In the clinic
Epithelial transition between the abdominal 
esophagus and stomach
The gastroesophageal junction is demarcated by a 
transition from one epithelial type (nonkeratinized 
stratified squamous epithelium) to another epithelial type 
(columnar epithelium). In some people, the histological 
junction does not lie at the anatomical gastroesophageal 
junction but occurs more proximally in the lower third of 
the esophagus. This may predispose these people to 
esophageal ulceration and is also associated with an 
increased risk of adenocarcinoma. In certain conditions, 
like gastroesophageal reflux, the stratified squamous 
epithelium in the esophagus can undergo metaplasia and 
the epithelium in the lower esophagus is replaced by 
columnar epithelium, a condition called Barrett’s 
esophagus. The presence of Barrett’s esophagus 
predisposes these people to the development of 
esophageal malignancy (adenocarcinoma).
Fig. 4.71  Arterial supply to the ileum. 
Jejunal and ileal arteries
Superior mesenteric artery
In the clinic
Duodenal ulceration
Duodenal ulcers usually occur in the superior part of the 
duodenum and are much less common than they were 50 
years ago. At first, there was no treatment and patients died 
from hemorrhage or peritonitis. As surgical techniques 
developed, patients with duodenal ulcers were subjected to 
extensive upper gastrointestinal surgery to prevent ulcer 
recurrence and for some patients the treatment was 
dangerous. As knowledge and understanding of the 
mechanisms for acid secretion in the stomach increased, 
drugs were developed to block acid stimulation and 
secretion indirectly (histamine H2-receptor antagonists) and 
these have significantly reduced the morbidity and mortality 
rates of this disease. Pharmacological therapy can now 
directly inhibit the cells of the stomach that produce acid 
with, for example, proton pump inhibitors. Patients are also 
screened for the bacteria Helicobacter pylori, which when 
eradicated (by antibiotic treatment) significantly reduces 
duodenal ulcer formation.
Anatomically, duodenal ulcers tend to occur either 
anteriorly or posteriorly.
Posterior duodenal ulcers erode either directly onto the 
gastroduodenal artery or, more commonly, onto the 
posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery, which can 
produce torrential hemorrhage, which may be fatal in some 
patients. Treatment may involve extensive upper abdominal 
surgery with ligation of the vessels or by endovascular 
means whereby the radiologist may place a very fine 
catheter retrogradely from the femoral artery into the celiac 
artery. The common hepatic artery and the gastroduodenal 
artery are cannulated and the bleeding area may be blocked 
using small coils, which stem the flow of blood.
Anterior duodenal ulcers erode into the peritoneal 
cavity, causing peritonitis. This intense inflammatory reaction 
and the local ileus promote adhesion of the greater 
omentum, which attempts to seal off the perforation. The 
stomach and duodenum usually contain considerable 
amounts of gas, which enters the peritoneal cavity and can 
be observed on a chest radiograph of an erect patient as 
subdiaphragmatic gas. In most instances, treatment for the 
ulcer perforation is surgical.

=== PAGE 327 ===
Abdomen
320
Fig. 4.88  Colon. 
Right paracolic gutter
Transverse colon
Ascending colon
Sigmoid colon
Sigmoid colon
Descending colon
Descending colon
Left paracolic gutter
Anal canal
Rectum
Transverse colon
Colon
The colon extends superiorly from the cecum and consists 
of the ascending, transverse, descending, and sigmoid 
colon (Fig. 4.88). Its ascending and descending segments 
are (secondarily) retroperitoneal and its transverse and 
sigmoid segments are intraperitoneal.
At the junction of the ascending and transverse colon 
is the right colic flexure, which is just inferior to the right 
lobe of the liver (Fig. 4.89). A similar, but more acute bend 
(the left colic flexure) occurs at the junction of the trans­
verse and descending colon. This bend is just inferior to the 
spleen, is higher and more posterior than the right colic 
flexure, and is attached to the diaphragm by the phrenico­
colic ligament.
Immediately lateral to the ascending and descending 
colon are the right and left paracolic gutters (Fig. 4.88). 
These depressions are formed between the lateral margins 
of the ascending and descending colon and the posterolat­
eral abdominal wall and are gutters through which mate­
rial can pass from one region of the peritoneal cavity to 
another. Because major vessels and lymphatics are on 
the medial or posteromedial sides of the ascending and 
descending colon, a relatively blood-free mobilization of the 
ascending and descending colon is possible by cutting the 
peritoneum along these lateral paracolic gutters.
The final segment of the colon (the sigmoid colon) 
begins above the pelvic inlet and extends to the level of 
vertebra SIII, where it is continuous with the rectum 
(Fig. 4.88). This S-shaped structure is quite mobile except 
at its beginning, where it continues from the descending 
colon, and at its end, where it continues as the rectum. 
Between these points, it is suspended by the sigmoid 
mesocolon.

=== PAGE 331 ===
Abdomen
324
In the clinic
Bowel obstruction
A bowel obstruction can be either functional or due to a 
true obstruction. Mechanical obstruction is caused by an 
intraluminal, mural, or extrinsic mass which can be 
secondary to a foreign body, obstructing tumor in the wall, 
or extrinsic compression from an adhesion, or embryological 
band (Fig. 4.95).
A functional obstruction is usually due to an inability of 
the bowel to peristalse, which again has a number of causes, 
and most frequently is a postsurgical state due to excessive 
intraoperative bowel handling. Other causes may well 
include abnormality of electrolytes (e.g., sodium and 
potassium) rendering the bowel paralyzed until correction 
has occurred.
The signs and symptoms of obstruction depend on the 
level at which the obstruction has occurred. The primary 
symptom is central abdominal, intermittent, colicky pain as 
the peristaltic waves try to overcome the obstruction. 
Abdominal distention will occur if it is a low obstruction 
(distal), allowing more proximal loops of bowel to fill with 
fluid. A high obstruction (in the proximal small bowel) may 
not produce abdominal distention.
Vomiting and absolute constipation, including the 
inability to pass flatus, will ensue.
Early diagnosis is important because considerable fluid 
and electrolytes enter the bowel lumen and fail to be 
reabsorbed, which produces dehydration and electrolyte 
abnormalities. Furthermore, the bowel continues to distend, 
compromising the blood supply within the bowel wall, 
which may lead to ischemia and perforation. The symptoms 
and signs are variable and depend on the level of 
obstruction.
Small bowel obstruction is typically caused by adhesions 
following previous surgery, and history should always be 
sought for any operations or abdominal interventions (e.g., 
previous appendectomy). Other causes include bowel 
passing into hernias (e.g., inguinal) and bowel twisting 
on its own mesentery (volvulus). Examination of hernial 
orifices is mandatory in patients with bowel obstruction 
(Fig. 4.96).
Fig. 4.95  This radiograph of the abdomen, anteroposterior view, 
demonstrates a number of dilated loops of small bowel. Small 
bowel can be identified by the plicae circulares that pass from 
wall to wall as indicated. The large bowel is not dilated. The 
cause of the small bowel dilatation is an adhesion after pelvic 
surgery. 
Dilation of small bowel
Plicae circulares
Fig. 4.96  Coronal CT demonstrates dilated and fluid-filled loops 
of small bowel in patient with small bowel obstruction. 
Dilated and fluid-filled
loops of small bowel

=== PAGE 332 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
325
In the clinic—cont’d
Large bowel obstruction is commonly caused by a tumor. 
Other potential causes include hernias and inflammatory 
diverticular disease of the sigmoid colon (Fig. 4.97).
The treatment is intravenous replacement of fluid and 
electrolytes, analgesia, and relief of obstruction. The passage 
of a nasogastric tube allows aspiration of fluid from the 
stomach. In many instances, small bowel obstruction, 
typically secondary to adhesions, will settle with 
nonoperative management. Large bowel obstruction may 
require an urgent operation to remove the obstructing 
lesion, or a temporary bypass procedure (e.g., defunctioning 
colostomy) (Fig. 4.98).
Fig. 4.97  Coronal CT of abdomen shows fluid-filled and dilated 
ascending and transverse colon in patient with large bowel 
obstruction. 
Fluid-filled and dilated ascending and 
transverse colon
Fig. 4.98  This oblique radiograph demonstrates contrast passing 
through a colonic stent that has been placed to relieve bowel 
obstruction prior to surgery. 
Distal large bowel
Colonic stent
Rectum

=== PAGE 335 ===
Abdomen
328
Fig. 4.101  Position of the liver in the abdomen. 
Intertubercular plane
Subcostal plane
Midclavicular planes
Liver
Fig. 4.102  Surfaces of the liver and recesses associated with the 
liver. 
Diaphragm
Liver
Kidney
Subphrenic recess
Hepatorenal recess
Fig. 4.103  Diaphragmatic surface of the liver. 
Diaphragm
Left lobe
Right lobe
Falciform
ligament
Gallbladder
Liver
The liver is the largest visceral organ in the body and is 
primarily in the right hypochondrium and epigastric 
region, extending into the left hypochondrium (or in the 
right upper quadrant, extending into the left upper quad­
rant) (Fig. 4.101).
Surfaces of the liver include:
■	 a diaphragmatic surface in the anterior, superior, and 
posterior directions; and
■	 a visceral surface in the inferior direction (Fig. 4.102).
Diaphragmatic surface
The diaphragmatic surface of the liver, which is smooth 
and domed, lies against the inferior surface of the dia­
phragm (Fig. 4.103). Associated with it are the subphrenic 
and hepatorenal recesses (Fig. 4.102):
■	 The subphrenic recess separates the diaphragmatic 
surface of the liver from the diaphragm and is divided 
into right and left areas by the falciform ligament, a 
structure derived from the ventral mesentery in the 
embryo.
■	 The hepatorenal recess is a part of the peritoneal cavity 
on the right side between the liver and the right kidney 
and right suprarenal gland.
The subphrenic and hepatorenal recesses are continu­
ous anteriorly.

=== PAGE 337 ===
Abdomen
330
Fig. 4.105  Posterior view of the bare area of the liver and associated ligaments. 
Inferior vena cava
Suprarenal impression
Left lobe of liver
Right lobe of liver 
Renal impression
Caudate lobe
Gastric impression
Esophageal impression
Colic impression
Quadrate lobe
Falciform ligament
Gallbladder
Porta hepatis
Anterior coronary ligament
Posterior coronary ligament
Right triangular
ligament
Left triangular ligament
Bare area
Fundus
Body
Neck
liver against the diaphragm (the bare area), the liver is 
almost completely surrounded by visceral peritoneum (Fig. 
4.105). Additional folds of peritoneum connect the liver to 
the stomach (hepatogastric ligament), the duodenum 
(hepatoduodenal ligament), and the diaphragm (right 
and left triangular ligaments and anterior and poste­
rior coronary ligaments).
The bare area of the liver is a part of the liver on the 
diaphragmatic surface where there is no intervening peri­
toneum between the liver and the diaphragm (Fig. 4.105):
■	 The anterior boundary of the bare area is indicated by 
a reflection of peritoneum—the anterior coronary 
ligament.
■	 The posterior boundary of the bare area is indicated by 
a reflection of peritoneum—the posterior coronary 
ligament.
■	 Where the coronary ligaments come together laterally, 
they form the right and left triangular ligaments.
Lobes
The liver is divided into right and left lobes by the falciform 
ligament anterosuperiorly and the fissure for the ligamen­
tum venosum and ligamentum teres on the visceral surface. 
(Fig. 4.104). The right lobe of  the liver is the largest 
lobe, whereas the left lobe of  the liver is smaller. The 
quadrate and caudate lobes are described as arising from 
the right lobe of the liver but functionally are distinct.
■	 The quadrate lobe is visible on the anterior part of the 
visceral surface of the liver and is bounded on the left by 
the fissure for the ligamentum teres and on the right 
by the fossa for the gallbladder. Functionally, it is related 
to the left lobe of the liver.
■	 The caudate lobe is visible on the posterior part of the 
visceral surface of the liver. It is bounded on the left by 
the fissure for the ligamentum venosum and on the right 
by the groove for the inferior vena cava. Functionally, it 
is separate from the right and the left lobes of the liver.
The arterial supply to the liver includes:
■	 the right hepatic artery from the hepatic artery proper 
(a branch of the common hepatic artery from the celiac 
trunk), and
■	 the left hepatic artery from the hepatic artery proper (a 
branch of the common hepatic artery from the celiac 
trunk).
Gallbladder
The gallbladder is a pear-shaped sac lying on the visceral 
surface of the right lobe of the liver in a fossa between the 
right and quadrate lobes (Fig. 4.104). It has:
■	 a rounded end (fundus of  the gallbladder), which 
may project from the inferior border of the liver;

=== PAGE 344 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
337
Fig. 4.112  Spleen. 
Diaphragm
Liver
Stomach
Greater
omentum
Descending
colon
Small
intestine
Spleen
Falciform
ligament
Parietal
peritoneum
Rib X
Fig. 4.113  Splenic ligaments and related vasculature. 
Lesser omentum
Stomach
Left kidney
Splenorenal 
ligament
Spleen
Gastrosplenic
ligament
Visceral
peritoneum
Spleen
The spleen develops as part of the vascular system in the 
part of the dorsal mesentery that suspends the developing 
stomach from the body wall. In the adult, the spleen lies 
against the diaphragm, in the area of rib IX to rib X (Fig. 
4.112). It is therefore in the left upper quadrant, or left 
hypochondrium, of the abdomen.
The spleen is connected to the:
■	 greater curvature of the stomach by the gastrosplenic 
ligament, which contains the short gastric and gastro-
omental vessels; and
■	 left kidney by the splenorenal ligament (Fig. 4.113), 
which contains the splenic vessels.
Both these ligaments are parts of the greater omentum.
The spleen is surrounded by visceral peritoneum except 
in the area of the hilum on the medial surface of the spleen 
(Fig. 4.114). The splenic hilum is the entry point for the 
splenic vessels, and occasionally the tail of the pancreas 
reaches this area.
The arterial supply to the spleen (Fig. 4.115) is the 
splenic artery from the celiac trunk.

=== PAGE 345 ===
Abdomen
338
Fig. 4.114  Surfaces and hilum of the spleen. 
Upper pole
Diaphragmatic 
surface
Visceral surface
Lower pole
Hilum
Fig. 4.115  Arterial supply to the spleen. 
Hepatic artery proper
Right gastro-omental artery
Left gastro-
omental artery
Posterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
Anterior superior pancreaticoduodenal artery
Left gastric
artery
Right gastric artery
Short gastric arteries
Splenic artery
Gastroduodenal artery
Abdominal aorta
In the clinic
Segmental anatomy of the liver
For many years the segmental anatomy of the liver was of 
little importance. However, since the development of liver 
resection surgery, the size, shape, and segmental anatomy 
of the liver have become clinically important, especially 
with regard to liver resection for metastatic disease. 
Indeed, with detailed knowledge of the segments, 
curative surgery can be performed in patients with tumor 
metastases.
The liver is divided by the principal plane, which divides 
the organ into halves of approximately equal size. This 
imaginary line is defined by a parasagittal line that passes 
through the gallbladder fossa to the inferior vena cava. It is in 
this plane that the middle hepatic vein is found. Importantly, 
the principal plane divides the left half of the liver from the 
right half. The lobes of the liver are unequal in size and bear 
only little relevance to operative anatomy.

=== PAGE 347 ===
Abdomen
340
In the clinic
Gallstones
Gallstones are present in approximately 10% of people over 
the age of 40 and are more common in women. They 
consist of a variety of components but are predominantly a 
mixture of cholesterol and bile pigment. They may undergo 
calcification, which can be demonstrated on plain 
radiographs. Gallstones may be visualized incidentally as 
part of a routine abdominal ultrasound scan (Fig. 4.117) or on 
a plain radiograph.
The easiest way to confirm the presence of gallstones is 
by performing a fasting ultrasound examination of the 
gallbladder. The patient refrains from eating for 6 hours to 
ensure the gallbladder is well distended and there is little 
shadowing from overlying bowel gas. The examination may 
also identify bile duct dilation and the presence of 
cholecystitis. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) is another way to image the gallbladder and biliary 
tree. MRCP uses fluid present in the bile ducts and in the 
pancreatic duct as a contrast agent to show stones as well as 
filling defects within the gallbladder and intrahepatic or 
extrahepatic bile ducts. It can demonstrate strictures in the 
biliary tree and can also be used to visualize liver and 
pancreatic anatomy (Fig. 4.118).
From time to time, gallstones impact in the region of 
Hartmann’s pouch, which is a bulbous region of the neck of 
the gallbladder. When the gallstone lodges in this area, the 
gallbladder cannot empty normally and contractions of the 
gallbladder wall produce severe pain. If this persists, a 
cholecystectomy (removal of the gallbladder) may be 
necessary.
Sometimes the gallbladder may become inflamed 
(cholecystitis). If the inflammation involves the related 
parietal peritoneum of the diaphragm, pain may not only 
occur in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen but may 
also be referred to the shoulder on the right side. This 
referred pain is due to the innervation of the visceral 
peritoneum of the diaphragm by spinal cord levels (C3 to C5) 
that also innervate skin over the shoulder. In this case, one 
somatic sensory region of low sensory output (diaphragm) is 
referred to another somatic sensory region of high sensory 
output (dermatomes).
From time to time, small gallstones pass into the bile 
duct and are trapped in the region of the sphincter of the 
ampulla, which obstructs the flow of bile into the 
duodenum. This, in turn, produces jaundice.
ERCP
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) can 
be undertaken to remove obstructing gallstones within the 
biliary tree. This procedure combines endoluminal 
endoscopy with fluoroscopy to diagnose and treat problems 
in the biliary and pancreatic ducts. An endoscope with a 
side-viewing optical system is advanced through the 
Fig. 4.117  Gallbladder containing multiple stones. Ultrasound 
scan. 
Gallbladder
Gallstones
Fig. 4.118  Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography 
(MRCP) in the coronal plane. 
Gallbladder
Hepatic duct
Cystic duct

=== PAGE 350 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
343
Fig. 4.121  Anterior branches of the abdominal aorta. 
Diaphragm
Celiac trunk
Left common iliac artery
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Abdominal aorta
Aortic hiatus
Psoas major muscle
Anterior branches
Arterial supply
The abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the 
diaphragm, anterior to the lower border of vertebra TXII 
(Fig. 4.121). It descends through the abdomen, anterior to 
the vertebral bodies, and by the time it ends at the level of 
vertebra LIV it is slightly to the left of midline. The terminal 
branches of the abdominal aorta are the two common 
iliac arteries.
Anterior branches of the abdominal aorta
The abdominal aorta has anterior, lateral, and posterior 
branches as it passes through the abdominal cavity. 
The three anterior branches supply the gastrointestinal 
viscera: the celiac trunk and the superior mesenteric 
and inferior mesenteric arteries (Fig. 4.121).
The primitive gut tube can be divided into foregut, 
midgut, and hindgut regions. The boundaries of these 

=== PAGE 351 ===
Abdomen
344
duodenum (superior to the major papilla), liver, pan­
creas, and gallbladder. The spleen also develops in rela­
tion to the foregut region. The foregut is supplied by the 
celiac trunk.
■	 The midgut begins just inferior to the major duodenal 
papilla, in the descending part of the duodenum, and 
ends at the junction between the proximal two-thirds 
and distal one-third of the transverse colon. It includes 
the duodenum (inferior to the major duodenal papilla), 
jejunum, ileum, cecum, appendix, ascending colon, and 
right two-thirds of the transverse colon. The midgut is 
supplied by the superior mesenteric artery (Fig. 4.122).
■	 The hindgut begins just before the left colic flexure (the 
junction between the proximal two-thirds and distal 
one-third of the transverse colon) and ends midway 
through the anal canal. It includes the left one-third of 
the transverse colon, descending colon, sigmoid colon, 
rectum, and upper part of the anal canal. The hindgut 
is supplied by the inferior mesenteric artery (Fig. 4.122).
Celiac trunk
The celiac trunk is the anterior branch of the abdominal 
aorta supplying the foregut. It arises from the abdominal 
aorta immediately below the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm 
(Fig. 4.123), anterior to the upper part of vertebra LI. It 
immediately divides into the left gastric, splenic, and 
common hepatic arteries.
Left gastric artery
The left gastric artery is the smallest branch of the celiac 
trunk. It ascends to the cardioesophageal junction and 
sends esophageal branches upward to the abdominal 
part of the esophagus (Fig. 4.123). Some of these branches 
continue through the esophageal hiatus of the diaphragm 
and anastomose with esophageal branches from the tho­
racic aorta. The left gastric artery itself turns to the right 
and descends along the lesser curvature of the stomach 
in the lesser omentum. It supplies both surfaces of the 
stomach in this area and anastomoses with the right 
gastric artery.
regions are directly related to the areas of distribution 
of the three anterior branches of the abdominal aorta 
(Fig. 4.122).
■	 The foregut begins with the abdominal esophagus 
and ends just inferior to the major duodenal papilla, 
midway along the descending part of the duodenum. 
It includes the abdominal esophagus, stomach, 
Fig. 4.122  Divisions of the gastrointestinal tract into foregut, 
midgut, and hindgut, summarizing the primary arterial supply to 
each segment. 
Celiac trunk
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Abdominal
aorta
Foregut
Midgut
Hindgut

=== PAGE 361 ===
Abdomen
354
Ascending toward the liver, the portal vein passes pos­
terior to the superior part of the duodenum and enters the 
right margin of the lesser omentum. As it passes through 
this part of the lesser omentum, it is anterior to the omental 
foramen and posterior to both the bile duct, which is 
slightly to its right, and the hepatic artery proper, which is 
slightly to its left (see Fig. 4.125, p. 347).
On approaching the liver, the portal vein divides into 
right and left branches, which enter the liver paren­
chyma. Tributaries to the portal vein include:
■	 right and left gastric veins draining the lesser curva­
ture of the stomach and abdominal esophagus,
■	 cystic veins from the gallbladder, and
■	 the para-umbilical veins, which are associated with 
the obliterated umbilical vein and connect to veins 
on the anterior abdominal wall (Fig. 4.133 on p. 357).
Venous drainage
Venous drainage of the spleen, pancreas, gallbladder, and 
abdominal part of the gastrointestinal tract, except for the 
inferior part of the rectum, is through the portal system of 
veins, which deliver blood from these structures to the liver. 
Once blood passes through the hepatic sinusoids, it passes 
through progressively larger veins until it enters the hepatic 
veins, which return the venous blood to the inferior vena 
cava just inferior to the diaphragm.
Portal vein
The portal vein is the final common pathway for the 
transport of venous blood from the spleen, pancreas, gall­
bladder, and abdominal part of the gastrointestinal tract. 
It is formed by the union of the splenic vein and the 
superior mesenteric vein posterior to the neck of the 
pancreas at the level of vertebra LII (Fig. 4.131).
Fig. 4.131  Portal vein. 
Liver
Pancreas
Spleen
Superior mesenteric vein
Inferior mesenteric vein
Ileocolic vein
Splenic vein
Left gastric vein  
Portal vein
Middle colic vein
Right colic vein
Jejunal and ileal veins

=== PAGE 365 ===
Abdomen
358
Fig. 4.134  Lymphatic drainage of the abdominal portion of the 
gastrointestinal tract. 
Superior mesenteric nodes
Inferior vena cava
Inferior mesenteric nodes
Celiac nodes
Diaphragm
Aorta
Right kidney
Left kidney
Lymphatics
Lymphatic drainage of the abdominal part of the gastro­
intestinal tract, as low as the inferior part of the rectum, 
as well as the spleen, pancreas, gallbladder, and liver, is 
through vessels and nodes that eventually end in large 
collections of pre-aortic lymph nodes at the origins of 
the three anterior branches of the abdominal aorta, which 
supply these structures. These collections are therefore 
referred to as the celiac, superior mesenteric, and 
inferior mesenteric groups of pre-aortic lymph nodes. 
Lymph from viscera is supplied by three routes:
■	 The celiac trunk (i.e., structures that are part of the 
abdominal foregut) drains to pre-aortic nodes near the 
origin of the celiac trunk (Fig. 4.134)—these celiac 
nodes also receive lymph from the superior mesenteric 
and inferior mesenteric groups of pre-aortic nodes, and 
lymph from the celiac nodes enters the cisterna chyli.
■	 The superior mesenteric artery (i.e., structures that are 
part of the abdominal midgut) drains to pre-aortic 
nodes near the origin of the superior mesenteric artery 
(Fig. 4.134)—these superior mesenteric nodes also 
receive lymph from the inferior mesenteric groups of 
pre-aortic nodes, and lymph from the superior mesen­
teric nodes drains to the celiac nodes.
■	 The inferior mesenteric artery (i.e., structures that are 
part of the abdominal hindgut) drains to pre-aortic 
nodes near the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery 
(Fig. 4.134), and lymph from the inferior mesenteric 
nodes drains to the superior mesenteric nodes.
Innervation
Abdominal viscera are innervated by both extrinsic and 
intrinsic components of the nervous system:
■	 Extrinsic innervation involves receiving motor impulses 
from, and sending sensory information to, the central 
nervous system.
■	 Intrinsic innervation involves the regulation of digestive 
tract activities by a generally self-sufficient network of 
sensory and motor neurons (the enteric nervous 
system).
Abdominal viscera receiving extrinsic innervation 
include the abdominal part of the gastrointestinal tract, 
the spleen, the pancreas, the gallbladder, and the liver. 
These viscera send sensory information back to the central 
nervous system through visceral afferent fibers and receive 
motor impulses from the central nervous system through 
visceral efferent fibers.
The visceral efferent fibers are part of the sympathetic 
and parasympathetic parts of the autonomic division of 
the peripheral nervous system.
Structural components serving as conduits for these 
afferent and efferent fibers include posterior and anterior 
roots of the spinal cord, respectively, spinal nerves, anterior 
rami, white and gray rami communicantes, the sympa­
thetic trunks, splanchnic nerves carrying sympathetic 
fibers (thoracic, lumbar, and sacral), parasympathetic 
fibers (pelvic), the prevertebral plexus and related ganglia, 
and the vagus nerves [X].
The enteric nervous system consists of motor and 
sensory neurons in two interconnected plexuses in the walls 
of the gastrointestinal tract. These neurons control the 
coordinated contraction and relaxation of intestinal smooth 
muscle and regulate gastric secretion and blood flow.

=== PAGE 368 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Abdominal Viscera
4
361
celiac ganglion in the abdomen (a prevertebral ganglion 
associated with the celiac trunk).
■	 The lesser splanchnic nerve arises from the ninth and 
tenth (or tenth and eleventh) thoracic ganglia and 
travels to the aorticorenal ganglion.
■	 The least splanchnic nerve, when present, arises from 
the twelfth thoracic ganglion and travels to the renal 
plexus.
Lumbar and sacral splanchnic nerves
There are usually two to four lumbar splanchnic nerves, 
which pass from the lumbar part of the sympathetic trunk 
or associated ganglia and enter the prevertebral plexus 
(Fig. 4.136).
Similarly, the sacral splanchnic nerves pass from the 
sacral part of the sympathetic trunk or associated ganglia 
and enter the inferior hypogastric plexus, which is an 
extension of the prevertebral plexus into the pelvis.
Pelvic splanchnic nerves
The pelvic splanchnic nerves (parasympathetic root) 
are unique. They are the only splanchnic nerves that carry 
parasympathetic fibers. In other words, they do not origi­
nate from the sympathetic trunks. Rather, they originate 
directly from the anterior rami of S2 to S4. Preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers originating in the sacral spinal cord 
pass from the S2 to S4 spinal nerves to the inferior hypo­
gastric plexus (Fig. 4.136). Once in this plexus, some of 
these fibers pass upward, enter the abdominal prevertebral 
plexus, and distribute with the arteries supplying the 
hindgut. This provides the pathway for innervation of the 
distal one-third of the transverse colon, the descending 
colon, and the sigmoid colon by preganglionic parasympa­
thetic fibers.
Abdominal prevertebral plexus and ganglia
The abdominal prevertebral plexus is a collection of nerve 
fibers that surrounds the abdominal aorta and is continu­
ous onto its major branches. Scattered throughout the 
length of the abdominal prevertebral plexus are cell bodies 
of postganglionic sympathetic fibers. Some of these cell 
bodies are organized into distinct ganglia, while others are 
more random in their distribution. The ganglia are usually 
associated with specific branches of the abdominal aorta 
and named after these branches.
The three major divisions of the abdominal prevertebral 
plexus and associated ganglia are the celiac, aortic, and 
superior hypogastric plexuses (Fig. 4.137).
■	 The celiac plexus is the large accumulation of nerve 
fibers and ganglia associated with the roots of the celiac 
trunk and superior mesenteric artery immediately 
below the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm. Ganglia 
associated with the celiac plexus include two celiac 
ganglia, a single superior mesenteric ganglion, and two 
aorticorenal ganglia.
■	 The aortic plexus consists of nerve fibers and associated 
ganglia on the anterior and lateral surfaces of the 
abdominal aorta extending from just below the origin 
of the superior mesenteric artery to the bifurcation of 
the aorta into the two common iliac arteries. The major 
ganglion in this plexus is the inferior mesenteric gan­
glion at the root of the inferior mesenteric artery.
■	 The superior hypogastric plexus contains numerous 
small ganglia and is the final part of the abdominal 
prevertebral plexus before the prevertebral plexus con­
tinues into the pelvic cavity.
Each of these major plexuses gives origin to a number 
of secondary plexuses, which may also contain small 
ganglia. These plexuses are usually named after the vessels 
with which they are associated. For example, the celiac 
plexus is usually described as giving origin to the superior 
mesenteric plexus and the renal plexus, as well as other 
plexuses that extend out along the various branches of the 
celiac trunk. Similarly, the aortic plexus has secondary 
plexuses consisting of the inferior mesenteric plexus, the 
spermatic plexus, and the external iliac plexus.
Inferiorly, the superior hypogastric plexus divides into 
the hypogastric nerves, which descend into the pelvis 
and contribute to the formation of the inferior hypogastric 
or pelvic plexus (Fig. 4.137).
The abdominal prevertebral plexus receives:
■	 preganglionic parasympathetic and visceral afferent 
fibers from the vagus nerves [X],
■	 preganglionic sympathetic and visceral afferent fibers 
from the thoracic and lumbar splanchnic nerves, and
■	 preganglionic parasympathetic fibers from the pelvic 
splanchnic nerves.
Parasympathetic innervation
Parasympathetic innervation of the abdominal part of the 
gastrointestinal tract and of the spleen, pancreas, gallblad­
der, and liver is from two sources—the vagus nerves [X] 
and the pelvic splanchnic nerves.

=== PAGE 371 ===
Abdomen
364
■	 At the level of the intervertebral foramen, the anterior 
root (which contains the preganglionic fiber) and a 
posterior root join to form a spinal nerve.
■	 Outside the vertebral column, the preganglionic fiber 
leaves the anterior ramus of the spinal nerve through 
the white ramus communicans.
■	 The white ramus communicans, containing the pregan­
glionic fiber, connects to the sympathetic trunk.
■	 Entering the sympathetic trunk, the preganglionic fiber 
does not synapse but passes through the trunk and 
enters the greater splanchnic nerve.
■	 The greater splanchnic nerve passes through the crura 
of the diaphragm and enters the celiac ganglion.
■	 In the celiac ganglion, the preganglionic fiber synapses 
with a postganglionic neuron.
■	 The postganglionic fiber joins the plexus of nerve fibers 
surrounding the celiac trunk and continues along its 
branches.
■	 The postganglionic fiber travels through the plexus of 
nerves accompanying the branches of the celiac trunk 
supplying the stomach and eventually reaches its point 
of distribution.
■	 This input from the sympathetic system may modify the 
activities of the gastrointestinal tract controlled by the 
enteric nervous system.
the inferior mesenteric artery and provide parasympathetic 
innervation to the hindgut.
Enteric system
The enteric system is a division of the visceral part of the 
nervous system and is a local neuronal circuit in the wall 
of the gastrointestinal tract. It consists of motor and 
sensory neurons organized into two interconnected plex­
uses (the myenteric and submucosal plexuses) between 
the layers of the gastrointestinal wall, and the associated 
nerve fibers that pass between the plexuses and from the 
plexuses to the adjacent tissue (Fig. 4.139).
The enteric system regulates and coordinates numerous 
gastrointestinal tract activities, including gastric secretory 
activity, gastrointestinal blood flow, and the contraction 
and relaxation cycles of smooth muscle (peristalsis).
Although the enteric system is generally independent of 
the central nervous system, it does receive input from 
postganglionic sympathetic and preganglionic parasympa­
thetic neurons that modifies its activities.
Sympathetic innervation of the stomach
The pathway of sympathetic innervation of the stomach 
is as follows:
■	 A preganglionic sympathetic fiber originating at the T6 
level of the spinal cord enters an anterior root to leave 
the spinal cord.
Fig. 4.139  The enteric system. 
Circular muscle layer
Submucosal plexus
Submucosa
Mucosal muscle
Myenteric plexus
Longitudinal muscle layer
Peritoneum
Mesentery

=== PAGE 373 ===
Abdomen
366
Fig. 4.140  Posterior abdominal region. 
Diaphragm
Esophagus
Abdominal aorta
Left suprarenal gland
Left kidney
Right suprarenal gland
Right kidney
Inferior vena cava
Ureter
Bladder
Gonadal vessels
POSTERIOR ABDOMINAL REGION
The posterior abdominal region is posterior to the abdomi­
nal part of the gastrointestinal tract, the spleen, and the 
pancreas (Fig. 4.140). This area, bounded by bones and 
muscles making up the posterior abdominal wall, contains 
numerous structures that not only are directly involved in 
the activities of the abdominal contents but also use this 
area as a conduit between body regions. Examples include 
the abdominal aorta and its associated nerve plexuses, the 
inferior vena cava, the sympathetic trunks, and lymphat­
ics. There are also structures originating in this area that 
are critical to the normal function of other regions of the 
body (i.e., the lumbar plexus of nerves), and there are 
organs that associate with this area during development 
and remain in it in the adult (i.e., the kidneys and suprare­
nal glands).

=== PAGE 375 ===
Abdomen
368
Muscles
Muscles forming the medial, lateral, inferior, and superior 
boundaries of the posterior abdominal region fill in 
the bony framework of the posterior abdominal wall 
(Table 4.2). Medially are the psoas major and minor 
muscles, laterally is the quadratus lumborum muscle, 
inferiorly is the iliacus muscle, and superiorly is the dia­
phragm (Figs. 4.142 and 4.143).
Psoas major and minor
Medially, the psoas major muscles cover the anterolateral 
surface of the bodies of the lumbar vertebrae, filling in the 
space between the vertebral bodies and the transverse 
processes (Fig. 4.142). Each of these muscles arises from 
the bodies of vertebra TXII and all five lumbar vertebrae, 
from the intervertebral discs between each vertebra, and 
from the transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae. 
Passing inferiorly along the pelvic brim, each muscle con­
tinues into the anterior thigh, under the inguinal ligament, 
to attach to the lesser trochanter of the femur.
The psoas major muscle flexes the thigh at the hip joint 
when the trunk is stabilized and flexes the trunk against 
gravity when the body is supine. It is innervated by anterior 
rami of nerves L1 to L3.
Associated with the psoas major muscle is the psoas 
minor muscle, which is sometimes absent. Lying on the 
surface of the psoas major when present, this slender 
muscle arises from vertebrae TXII and LI and the inter­
vening intervertebral disc; its long tendon inserts into the 
pectineal line of the pelvic brim and the iliopubic eminence.
Fig. 4.142  Muscles of the posterior abdominal wall. 
Lumbar vessels
Transversus abdominis
Quadratus lumborum
Psoas minor
Iliacus
Psoas major
Table 4.2  Posterior abdominal wall muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Psoas major
Lateral surface of bodies of TXII 
and LI to LV vertebrae, 
transverse processes of the 
lumbar vertebrae, and the 
intervertebral discs between 
TXII and LI to LV vertebrae
Lesser trochanter of the 
femur
Anterior rami of L1 to L3
Flexion of thigh at hip joint
Psoas minor
Lateral surface of bodies of TXII 
and LI vertebrae and 
intervening intervertebral disc
Pectineal line of the pelvic 
brim and iliopubic eminence
Anterior rami of L1
Weak flexion of lumbar 
vertebral column
Quadratus 
lumborum
Transverse process of LV 
vertebra, iliolumbar ligament, 
and iliac crest
Transverse processes of LI to 
LIV vertebrae and inferior 
border of rib XII
Anterior rami of T12 and 
L1 to L4
Depress and stabilize rib XII 
and some lateral bending of 
trunk
Iliacus
Upper two-thirds of iliac fossa, 
anterior sacro-iliac and 
iliolumbar ligaments, and upper 
lateral surface of sacrum
Lesser trochanter of femur
Femoral nerve (L2 to L4)
Flexion of thigh at hip joint

=== PAGE 376 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
369
Iliacus
Inferiorly, an iliacus muscle fills the iliac fossa on each side 
(Fig. 4.142). From this expansive origin covering the iliac 
fossa, the muscle passes inferiorly, joins with the psoas 
major muscle, and attaches to the lesser trochanter of the 
femur. As they pass into the thigh, these combined muscles 
are referred to as the iliopsoas muscle.
Like the psoas major muscle, the iliacus flexes the thigh 
at the hip joint when the trunk is stabilized and flexes the 
trunk against gravity when the body is supine. It is inner­
vated by branches of the femoral nerve.
Diaphragm
Superiorly, the diaphragm forms the boundary of the pos­
terior abdominal region. This musculotendinous sheet also 
separates the abdominal cavity from the thoracic cavity.
Structurally, the diaphragm consists of a central tendi­
nous part into which the circumferentially arranged 
muscle fibers attach (Fig. 4.143). The diaphragm is 
The psoas minor is a weak flexor of the lumbar vertebral 
column and is innervated by the anterior ramus of 
nerve L1.
Quadratus lumborum
Laterally, the quadratus lumborum muscles fill the space 
between rib XII and the iliac crest on both sides of the 
vertebral column (Fig. 4.142). They are overlapped medi­
ally by the psoas major muscles; along their lateral borders 
are the transversus abdominis muscles.
Each quadratus lumborum muscle arises from the 
transverse process of vertebra LV, the iliolumbar ligament, 
and the adjoining part of the iliac crest. The muscle 
attaches superiorly to the transverse process of the first 
four lumbar vertebrae and the inferior border of rib XII.
The quadratus lumborum muscles depress and stabilize 
the twelfth ribs and contribute to lateral bending of the 
trunk. Acting together, the muscles may extend the lumbar 
part of the vertebral column. They are innervated by 
anterior rami of T12 and L1 to L4 spinal nerves.
Fig. 4.143  Diaphragm. 
Left phrenic nerve
Right phrenic nerve
Inferior phrenic
artery
Aorta
Thoracic duct
Esophagus with anterior
and posterior vagal trunks
LIV
LIII
LII
LI
Superior epigastric artery
Central tendon
Inferior vena cava
Hemi-azygos vein
Greater splanchnic nerve
Lesser splanchnic nerve
Least splanchnic nerve
Left crus
Sympathetic trunk
Right crus

=== PAGE 377 ===
Abdomen
370
anchored to the lumbar vertebrae by musculotendinous 
crura, which blend with the anterior longitudinal ligament 
of the vertebral column:
■	 The right crus is the longest and broadest of the crura 
and is attached to the bodies of vertebrae LI to LIII and 
the intervening intervertebral discs (Fig. 4.144).
■	 Similarly, the left crus is attached to vertebrae LI and LII 
and the associated intervertebral disc.
The crura are connected across the midline by a tendi­
nous arch (the median arcuate ligament), which passes 
anterior to the aorta (Fig. 4.144).
Lateral to the crura, a second tendinous arch is formed 
by the fascia covering the upper part of the psoas major 
muscle. This is the medial arcuate ligament, which is 
attached medially to the sides of vertebrae LI and LII 
and laterally to the transverse process of vertebra LI 
(Fig. 4.144).
A third tendinous arch, the lateral arcuate ligament, 
is formed by a thickening in the fascia that covers the 
quadratus lumborum. It is attached medially to the 
Fig. 4.144  Crura of the diaphragm. 
Esophagus
LI
LII
LIII
TXII
Rib XII
Left crus
Right crus
Median arcuate
ligament
Medial arcuate
ligament
Lateral arcuate
ligament
transverse process of vertebra LI and laterally to rib XII 
(Fig. 4.144).
The medial and lateral arcuate ligaments serve as points 
of origin for some of the muscular components of the 
diaphragm.
Structures passing through or around the diaphragm
Numerous structures pass through or around the dia­
phragm (Fig. 4.143):
■	 The aorta passes posterior to the diaphragm and ante­
rior to the vertebral bodies at the lower level of vertebra 
TXII; it is between the two crura of the diaphragm and 
posterior to the median arcuate ligament, just to the left 
of midline.
■	 Accompanying the aorta through the aortic hiatus is 
the thoracic duct and, sometimes, the azygos vein.
■	 The esophagus passes through the musculature of the 
right crus of the diaphragm at the level of vertebra TX, 
just to the left of the aortic hiatus.
■	 Passing through the esophageal hiatus with the esopha­
gus are the anterior and posterior vagal trunks, the 
esophageal branches of the left gastric artery and vein, 
and a few lymphatic vessels.
■	 The third large opening in the diaphragm is the caval 
opening, through which the inferior vena cava passes 
from the abdominal cavity to the thoracic cavity (Fig. 
4.143) at approximately vertebra TVIII in the central 
tendinous part of the diaphragm.
■	 Accompanying the inferior vena cava through the caval 
opening is the right phrenic nerve.
■	 The left phrenic nerve passes through the muscular part 
of the diaphragm just anterior to the central tendon on 
the left side.
Additional structures pass through small openings 
either in or just outside the diaphragm as they pass from 
the thoracic cavity to the abdominal cavity (Fig. 4.143):
■	 The greater, lesser, and least (when present) splanchnic 
nerves pass through the crura, on either side.
■	 The hemi-azygos vein passes through the left crus.
■	 Passing posterior to the medial arcuate ligament, on 
either side, are the sympathetic trunks.
■	 Passing anterior to the diaphragm, just deep to the ribs, 
are the superior epigastric vessels.
■	 Other vessels and nerves (i.e., the musculophrenic 
vessels and intercostal nerves) also pass through the 
diaphragm at various points.

=== PAGE 378 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
371
domes, enlargement of the thoracic cavity, and a reduction 
in intrathoracic pressure. The physiological effect of these 
changes is that air enters the lungs and venous return to 
the heart is enhanced.
Blood supply
There is blood supply to the diaphragm on its superior and 
inferior surfaces:
■	 Superiorly, the musculophrenic and pericardiacophrenic 
arteries, both branches of the internal thoracic artery, 
and the superior phrenic artery, a branch of the thoracic 
aorta, supply the diaphragm.
■	 Inferiorly, the inferior phrenic arteries, branches of the 
abdominal aorta, supply the diaphragm (see Fig. 4.143).
Venous drainage is through companion veins to these 
arteries.
Innervation
Innervation of the diaphragm is primarily by the phrenic 
nerves. These nerves, from the C3 to C5 spinal cord levels, 
provide all motor innervation to the diaphragm and 
sensory fibers to the central part. They pass through the 
thoracic cavity, between the mediastinal pleura and the 
pericardium, to the superior surface of the diaphragm. At 
this point, the right phrenic nerve accompanies the inferior 
vena cava through the diaphragm and the left phrenic 
nerve passes through the diaphragm by itself (see 
Fig. 4.143). Additional sensory fibers are supplied to the 
peripheral areas of the diaphragm by intercostal nerves.
Domes
The classic appearance of the right and left domes of the 
diaphragm is caused by the underlying abdominal contents 
pushing these lateral areas upward, and by the fibrous 
pericardium, which is attached centrally, causing a flatten­
ing of the diaphragm in this area (Fig. 4.145).
The domes are produced by:
■	 the liver on the right, with some contribution from the 
right kidney and the right suprarenal gland, and
■	 the fundus of the stomach and spleen on the left, with 
contributions from the left kidney and the left suprare­
nal gland.
Although the height of these domes varies during 
breathing, a reasonable estimate in normal expiration 
places the left dome at the fifth intercostal space and the 
right dome at rib V. This is important to remember when 
percussing the thorax.
During inspiration, the muscular part of the diaphragm 
contracts, causing the central tendon of the diaphragm to 
be drawn inferiorly. This results in some flattening of the 
Fig. 4.145  Right and left domes of the diaphragm. Chest 
radiograph. 
Left dome of
diaphragm
Right dome of
diaphragm
Heart
In the clinic
Psoas muscle abscess
At first glance, it is difficult to appreciate why the psoas 
muscle sheath is of greater importance than any other 
muscle sheath. The psoas muscle and its sheath arise not 
only from the lumbar vertebrae but also from the 
intervertebral discs between each vertebra. This disc origin 
is of critical importance. In certain types of infection, the 
intervertebral disc is preferentially affected (e.g., 
tuberculosis and salmonella discitis). As the infection of 
the disc develops, the infection spreads anteriorly and 
anterolaterally. In the anterolateral position, the infection 
passes into the psoas muscle sheath, and spreads within 
the muscle and sheath, and may appear below the 
inguinal ligament as a mass.

=== PAGE 379 ===
Abdomen
372
In the clinic
Diaphragmatic hernias
To understand why a hernia occurs through the diaphragm, 
it is necessary to consider the embryology of the 
diaphragm.
The diaphragm is formed from four structures—
the septum transversum, the posterior esophageal 
mesentery, the pleuroperitoneal membrane, and the 
peripheral rim—which eventually fuse together, separating 
the abdominal cavity from the thoracic cavity. The 
septum transversum forms the central tendon, which 
develops from a mesodermal origin superior to the 
embryo’s head and then moves to its more adult 
position during folding of the cephalic portion of the 
embryo.
Fusion of the various components of the diaphragm may 
fail, and hernias may occur through the failed points of 
fusion (Fig. 4.146). The commonest sites are:
■	 between the xiphoid process and the costal margins on 
the right (Morgagni’s hernia), and
■	 through an opening on the left when the pleuroperitoneal 
membrane fails to close the pericardioperitoneal canal 
(Bochdalek’s hernia).
Hernias may also occur through the central tendon and 
through a congenitally large esophageal hiatus.
Morgagni’s and Bochdalek’s hernias tend to appear at or 
around the time of birth or in early infancy. They allow 
abdominal bowel to enter the thoracic cavity, which may 
compress the lungs and reduce respiratory function. Most of 
these hernias require surgical closure of the diaphragmatic 
defect. However, large hernias can lead to pulmonary 
hypoplasia and the long-term outcome depends more on 
the degree of the hypoplasia rather than on the surgical 
repair itself.
Occasionally, small defects within the diaphragm fail to 
permit bowel through, but do allow free movement of fluid. 
Patients with ascites may develop pleural effusions, while 
patients with pleural effusions may develop ascites when 
these defects are present.
Fig. 4.146  Fetal diaphragmatic hernia in utero. T2-weighted MR image. Fetus in coronal plane, mother in sagittal plane. 
Fetal vertebral
column
Fetal abdominal
contents (fluid-filled
loops of intestine)
in left side of
thoracic cavity
Fetal head
Normal fetal lung development on right
side of thoracic cavity
Fetal diaphragm
developed on
right side
Maternal lumbar
vertebra

=== PAGE 380 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
373
In the clinic
Hiatal hernia
At the level of the esophageal hiatus, the diaphragm may be 
lax, allowing the fundus of the stomach to herniate into the 
posterior mediastinum (Figs. 4.147 and 4.148). This typically 
causes symptoms of acid reflux. Ulceration may occur and 
may produce bleeding and anemia. The diagnosis is usually 
made by barium studies or endoscopy. Hiatal hernia is often 
asymptomatic and is frequently found incidentally on CT 
imaging performed for unrelated complaints. Treatment in 
the first instance is by medical management, although 
surgery may be necessary.
Gastroesophageal junction
Esophagus
Stomach
Hiatus
hernia
Position
of the
diaphragm
Fig. 4.147  Lower esophagus and upper stomach showing a 
hiatal hernia. Radiograph using barium. 
Fig. 4.148  Coronal CT of hiatal hernia. 
Liver
Hiatal hernia
Right lung
Left lung
Spleen
Right kidney
Left kidney

=== PAGE 381 ===
Abdomen
374
Viscera
Kidneys
The bean-shaped kidneys are retroperitoneal in the poste­
rior abdominal region (Fig. 4.149). They lie in the extra­
peritoneal connective tissue immediately lateral to the 
vertebral column. In the supine position, the kidneys 
Fig. 4.149  Retroperitoneal position of the kidneys in the posterior abdominal region. 
Inferior vena cava
Diaphragm
Right suprarenal gland
Left suprarenal gland
Right kidney
Left kidney
Cut edges of peritoneum
Abdominal aorta
Esophagus
extend from approximately vertebra TXII superiorly to 
vertebra LIII inferiorly, with the right kidney somewhat 
lower than the left because of its relationship with the liver. 
Although they are similar in size and shape, the left kidney 
is a longer and more slender organ than the right kidney, 
and nearer to the midline.

=== PAGE 383 ===
Abdomen
376
descending colon, and, on its medial side, by the parts 
of the intraperitoneal jejunum.
Posteriorly, the right and left kidneys are related to 
similar structures (Fig. 4.151). Superiorly is the diaphragm 
and inferior to this, moving in a medial to lateral direction, 
are the psoas major, quadratus lumborum, and transversus 
abdominis muscles.
The superior pole of the right kidney is anterior to rib 
XII, while the same region of the left kidney is anterior to 
ribs XI and XII. The pleural sacs and specifically the costo­
diaphragmatic recesses therefore extend posterior to the 
kidneys.
Also passing posterior to the kidneys are the subcostal 
vessels and nerves and the iliohypogastric and ilio-inguinal 
nerves.
Fig. 4.151  Structures related to the posterior surface of each kidney. 
Right kidney
Left kidney
Rib XII
Rib XII
Rib XI
Psoas major muscle
Diaphragm
Quadratus lumborum muscle
Transversus abdominis muscle

=== PAGE 384 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
377
Fig. 4.152  Organization of fat and fascia surrounding the kidney. 
Inferior vena cava
Psoas major muscle
Quadratus lumborum muscle
Transversalis
fascia
Paranephric fat
Renal fascia
Perinephric fat
Anterolateral abdominal
wall muscles
Kidney
Peritoneum
Renal fat and fascia
The kidneys are enclosed in and associated with a unique 
arrangement of fascia and fat. Immediately outside the 
renal capsule, there is an accumulation of extraperitoneal 
fat—the perinephric fat (perirenal fat), which com­
pletely surrounds the kidney (Fig. 4.152). Enclosing the 
perinephric fat is a membranous condensation of the 
extraperitoneal fascia (the renal fascia). The suprarenal 
glands are also enclosed in this fascial compartment, 
usually separated from the kidneys by a thin septum. The 
renal fascia must be incised in any surgical approach to 
this organ.
At the lateral margins of each kidney, the anterior and 
posterior layers of the renal fascia fuse (Fig. 4.152). This 
fused layer may connect with the transversalis fascia on 
the lateral abdominal wall.
Above each suprarenal gland, the anterior and posterior 
layers of the renal fascia fuse and blend with the fascia that 
covers the diaphragm.
Medially, the anterior layer of the renal fascia continues 
over the vessels in the hilum and fuses with the connective 
tissue associated with the abdominal aorta and the inferior 
vena cava (Fig. 4.152). In some cases, the anterior layer 
may cross the midline to the opposite side and blend with 
its companion layer.
The posterior layer of the renal fascia passes medially 
between the kidney and the fascia covering the quadratus 
lumborum muscle to fuse with the fascia covering the 
psoas major muscle.
Inferiorly, the anterior and posterior layers of the renal 
fascia enclose the ureters.
In addition to perinephric fat and the renal fascia, a final 
layer of paranephric fat (pararenal fat) completes 
the fat and fascias associated with the kidney (Fig. 4.152). 
This fat accumulates posterior and posterolateral to 
each kidney.

=== PAGE 391 ===
Abdomen
384
In the clinic
Kidney transplant
Renal transplantation is now a common procedure 
undertaken in patients with end-stage renal failure.
Transplant kidneys are obtained from either living or 
deceased donors. The living donors are carefully assessed, 
because harvesting a kidney from a normal healthy individual, 
even with modern-day medicine, carries a small risk.
Deceased kidney donors are brain dead or have suffered 
cardiac death. The donor kidney is harvested with a small cuff 
of aortic and venous tissue. The ureter is also harvested.
An ideal place to situate the transplant kidney is in the 
left or the right iliac fossa (Fig. 4.161). A curvilinear incision is 
made paralleling the iliac crest and pubic symphysis. The 
external oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversus 
abdominis muscle, and transversalis fascia are divided. The 
surgeon identifies the parietal peritoneum but does not 
enter the peritoneal cavity. The parietal peritoneum is 
medially retracted to reveal the external iliac artery, external 
iliac vein, and bladder. In some instances the internal iliac 
artery of the recipient is mobilized and anastomosed directly 
as an end-to-end procedure onto the renal artery of the 
donor kidney. Similarly the internal iliac vein is anastomosed 
to the donor vein. In the presence of a small aortic cuff of 
tissue the donor artery is anastomosed to the recipient 
external iliac artery and similarly for the venous anastomosis. 
The ureter is easily tunneled obliquely through the bladder 
wall with a straightforward anastomosis.
The left and right iliac fossae are ideal locations for the 
transplant kidney because a new space can be created 
without compromise to other structures. The great 
advantage of this procedure is the proximity to the anterior 
abdominal wall, which permits easy ultrasound visualization 
of the kidney and Doppler vascular assessment. 
Furthermore, in this position biopsies are easily obtained. 
The extraperitoneal approach enables patients to make a 
swift recovery.
A
Abdominal aorta
Common iliac artery
External iliac
artery
Internal iliac
artery
The left external iliac artery
has been used to connect
to the donor kidney
Transplant kidney
in the left iliac
fossa
B
Bladder
Iliac muscle
Transplant kidney in left iliac fossa
Fig. 4.161  Kidney transplant. A. This image demonstrates an MR angiogram of the bifurcation of the aorta. Attaching to the left external 
iliac artery is the donor artery for a kidney that has been transplanted into the left iliac fossa. B. Abdominal computed tomogram, in the 
axial plane, showing the transplanted kidney in the left iliac fossa. 

=== PAGE 394 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
387
Suprarenal vasculature
The arterial supply to the suprarenal glands is extensive 
and arises from three primary sources (Fig. 4.163):
■	 As the bilateral inferior phrenic arteries pass upward 
from the abdominal aorta to the diaphragm, they give 
off multiple branches (superior suprarenal arteries) to 
the suprarenal glands.
■	 A middle branch (middle suprarenal artery) to the 
suprarenal glands usually arises directly from the 
abdominal aorta.
■	 Inferior branches (inferior suprarenal arteries) from the 
renal arteries pass upward to the suprarenal glands.
In contrast to this multiple arterial supply is the venous 
drainage, which usually consists of a single vein leaving 
the hilum of each gland. On the right side, the right 
suprarenal vein is short and almost immediately enters 
the inferior vena cava, while on the left side, the left supra­
renal vein passes inferiorly to enter the left renal vein.
Suprarenal innervation
The suprarenal gland is mainly innervated by pregangli­
onic sympathetic fibers from spinal levels T8-L1 that pass 
through both the sympathetic trunk and the prevertebral 
plexus without synapsing. These preganglionic fibers 
directly innervate cells of the adrenal medulla.
Vasculature
Abdominal aorta
The abdominal aorta begins at the aortic hiatus of the 
diaphragm as a midline structure at approximately the 
lower level of vertebra TXII (Fig. 4.164). It passes down­
ward on the anterior surface of the bodies of vertebrae 
LI to LIV, ending just to the left of midline at the lower 
level of vertebra LIV. At this point, it divides into the 
right and left common iliac arteries. This bifurcation 
can be visualized on the anterior abdominal wall as a 
point approximately 2.5 cm below the umbilicus or even 
with a line extending between the highest points of the 
iliac crest.
Fig. 4.164  Abdominal aorta. 
Diaphragm
Superior mesenteric artery
Inferior mesenteric artery
Psoas major muscle
Left renal artery
Inferior phrenic arteries
Middle suprarenal artery
Middle suprarenal artery
Median sacral artery
Celiac trunk
Testicular or ovarian arteries
Lumbar arteries
Common iliac artery

=== PAGE 395 ===
Abdomen
388
Table 4.3  Branches of the abdominal aorta
Artery
Branch
Origin
Parts supplied
Celiac trunk
Anterior
Immediately inferior to the aortic hiatus of the 
diaphragm
Abdominal foregut
Superior mesenteric artery
Anterior
Immediately inferior to the celiac trunk
Abdominal midgut
Inferior mesenteric artery
Anterior
Inferior to the renal arteries
Abdominal hindgut
Middle suprarenal arteries
Lateral
Immediately superior to the renal arteries
Suprarenal glands
Renal arteries
Lateral
Immediately inferior to the superior 
mesenteric artery
Kidneys
Testicular or ovarian arteries
Paired anterior
Inferior to the renal arteries
Testes in male and ovaries in female
Inferior phrenic arteries
Lateral
Immediately inferior to the aortic hiatus
Diaphragm
Lumbar arteries
Posterior
Usually four pairs
Posterior abdominal wall and spinal 
cord
Median sacral artery
Posterior
Just superior to the aortic bifurcation, passes 
inferiorly across lumbar vertebrae, sacrum, 
and coccyx
Common iliac arteries
Terminal
Bifurcation usually occurs at the level of LIV 
vertebra
As the abdominal aorta passes through the posterior 
abdominal region, the prevertebral plexus of nerves and 
ganglia covers its anterior surface. It is also related to 
numerous other structures:
■	 Anterior to the abdominal aorta, as it descends, are the 
pancreas and splenic vein, the left renal vein, and the 
inferior part of the duodenum.
■	 Several left lumbar veins cross it posteriorly as they pass 
to the inferior vena cava.
■	 On its right side are the cisterna chyli, thoracic duct, 
azygos vein, right crus of the diaphragm, and the infe­
rior vena cava.
■	 On its left side is the left crus of the diaphragm.
Branches of the abdominal aorta (Table 4.3) can be 
classified as:
■	 visceral branches supplying organs,
■	 posterior branches supplying the diaphragm or body 
wall, or
■	 terminal branches.
Visceral branches
The visceral branches are either unpaired or paired 
vessels.
The three unpaired visceral branches that arise from 
the anterior surface of the abdominal aorta (Fig. 4.164) 
are:
■	 the celiac trunk, which supplies the abdominal foregut,
■	 the superior mesenteric artery, which supplies the 
abdominal midgut, and
■	 the inferior mesenteric artery, which supplies the 
abdominal hindgut.
The paired visceral branches of the abdominal aorta 
(Fig. 4.164) include:
■	 the middle suprarenal arteries—small, lateral branches 
of the abdominal aorta arising just above the renal 
arteries that are part of the multiple vascular supply to 
the suprarenal gland;
■	 the renal arteries—lateral branches of the abdominal 
aorta that arise just inferior to the origin of the superior 
mesenteric artery between vertebrae LI and LII, and 
supply the kidneys; and
■	 the testicular or ovarian arteries—anterior branches of 
the abdominal aorta that arise below the origin of the 
renal arteries, and pass downward and laterally on the 
anterior surface of the psoas major muscle.
Posterior branches
The posterior branches of the abdominal aorta are vessels 
supplying the diaphragm or body wall. They consist of the 
inferior phrenic arteries, the lumbar arteries, and the 
median sacral artery (Fig. 4.164).
Inferior phrenic arteries
The inferior phrenic arteries arise immediately inferior 
to the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm either directly from 
the abdominal aorta, as a common trunk from the abdomi­
nal aorta, or from the base of the celiac trunk (Fig. 4.164). 
Whatever their origin, they pass upward, provide some 
arterial supply to the suprarenal gland, and continue onto 
the inferior surface of the diaphragm.

=== PAGE 396 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
389
artery, which includes providing segmental branches that 
supply the spinal cord.
Median sacral artery
The final posterior branch is the median sacral artery 
(Fig. 4.164). This vessel arises from the posterior surface of 
the abdominal aorta just superior to the bifurcation and 
passes in an inferior direction, first over the anterior surface 
of the lower lumbar vertebrae and then over the anterior 
surface of the sacrum and coccyx.
Lumbar arteries
There are usually four pairs of lumbar arteries arising 
from the posterior surface of the abdominal aorta 
(Fig. 4.164). They run laterally and posteriorly over the 
bodies of the lumbar vertebrae, continue laterally, passing 
posterior to the sympathetic trunks and between the trans­
verse processes of adjacent lumbar vertebrae, and reach 
the abdominal wall. From this point onward, they demon­
strate a branching pattern similar to a posterior intercostal 
In the clinic
Abdominal aortic stent graft
An abdominal aortic aneurysm is a dilation of the aorta and 
generally tends to occur in the infrarenal region (the region at 
or below the renal arteries). As the aorta expands, the risk of 
rupture increases, and it is now generally accepted that when 
an aneurysm reaches 5.5 cm or greater an operation will 
significantly benefit the patient.
With the aging population, the number of abdominal 
aortic aneurysms is increasing. Moreover, with the increasing 
use of imaging techniques, a number of abdominal aortic 
aneurysms are identified in asymptomatic patients.
For many years the standard treatment for repair was an 
open operative technique, which involved a large incision 
from the xiphoid process of the sternum to the symphysis 
pubis and dissection of the aneurysm. The aneurysm was 
excised and a tubular woven graft was sewn into place. 
Recovery may take a number of days, even weeks, and 
most patients would be placed in the intensive care unit 
after the operation.
Further developments and techniques have led to a new 
type of procedure being performed to treat abdominal aortic 
aneurysms—the endovascular graft (Fig. 4.165).
The technique involves surgically dissecting the femoral 
artery below the inguinal ligament. A small incision is made 
in the femoral artery and the preloaded compressed graft 
with metal support struts is passed on a large catheter into 
the abdominal aorta through the femoral artery. Using X-ray 
for guidance the graft is opened, lining the inside of the 
aorta. Limb attachments are made to the graft that extend 
into the common iliac vessels. This bifurcated tube device 
effectively excludes the abdominal aortic aneurysm.
This type of device is not suitable for all patients. 
Patients who receive this device do not need to go to the 
intensive care unit. Many patients leave the hospital 
within 24 to 48 hours. Importantly, this device can be used 
for patients who were deemed unfit for open surgical 
repair.
Fig. 4.165  Volume-rendered reconstruction using multidetector computed tomography of patient with an infrarenal abdominal aortic 
aneurysm before (A) and after (B) endovascular aneurysm repair. Note the image only demonstrates the intraluminal contrast and not the 
entire vessel. White patches in the aorta represent intramural calcium. 
A
B

=== PAGE 397 ===
Abdomen
390
direction, and leaves the abdomen by piercing the central 
tendon of the diaphragm at the level of vertebra TVIII.
During its course, the anterior surface of the inferior 
vena cava is crossed by the right common iliac artery, the 
root of the mesentery, the right testicular or ovarian artery, 
the inferior part of the duodenum, the head of the pan­
creas, the superior part of the duodenum, the bile duct, the 
portal vein, and the liver, which overlaps and on occasion 
completely surrounds the vena cava (Fig. 4.166).
Inferior vena cava
The inferior vena cava returns blood from all structures 
below the diaphragm to the right atrium of the heart. It is 
formed when the two common iliac veins come together at 
the level of vertebra LV, just to the right of midline. It 
ascends through the posterior abdominal region anterior 
to the vertebral column immediately to the right of the 
abdominal aorta (Fig. 4.166), continues in a superior 
Fig. 4.166  Inferior vena cava. 
Inferior phrenic veins
Esophagus
Left kidney
Left renal vein
Abdominal aorta
Left femoral
artery and vein
Right femoral
artery and vein
Right testicular
or ovarian vein
Right kidney
Inferior vena cava
Hepatic veins
Left external iliac
artery and vein
Right external iliac
artery and vein

=== PAGE 399 ===
Abdomen
392
Table 4.4 (also see Chapter 1, pp. 27–28, for discussion of 
lymphatics in general).
Pre-aortic and lateral aortic or lumbar nodes 
(para-aortic nodes)
Approaching the aortic bifurcation, the collections of 
lymphatics associated with the two common iliac arteries 
and veins merge, and multiple groups of lymphatic vessels 
and nodes associated with the abdominal aorta and inferior 
Lymphatic system
Lymphatic drainage from most deep structures and regions 
of the body below the diaphragm converges mainly on 
collections of lymph nodes and vessels associated with the 
major blood vessels of the posterior abdominal region (Fig. 
4.168). The lymph then predominantly drains into the 
thoracic duct. Major lymphatic channels that drain differ­
ent regions of the body as a whole are summarized in 
Fig. 4.168  Abdominal lymphatics. 
Inferior vena cava
Intestinal trunk
Right lumbar trunk with
lateral aortic (lumbar) nodes
Left lumbar trunk with
lateral aortic (lumbar) nodes
External iliac nodes
External iliac nodes
Internal iliac nodes
Common iliac nodes
Celiac nodes
Superior mesenteric nodes
Inferior mesenteric nodes
Cisterna chyli
Pre-aortic nodes
Table 4.4  Lymphatic drainage
Lymphatic vessel
Area drained
Right jugular trunk
Right side of head and neck
Left jugular trunk
Left side of head and neck
Right subclavian trunk
Right upper limb, superficial regions of thoracic and upper abdominal walls
Left subclavian trunk
Left upper limb, superficial regions of thoracic and upper abdominal walls
Right bronchomediastinal trunk
Right lung and bronchi, mediastinal structures, thoracic wall
Left bronchomediastinal trunk
Left lung and bronchi, mediastinal structures, thoracic wall
Thoracic duct
Lower limbs, abdominal walls and viscera, pelvic walls and viscera, thoracic wall

=== PAGE 400 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
393
vena cava pass superiorly. These collections may be subdi­
vided into pre-aortic nodes, which are anterior to the 
abdominal aorta, and right and left lateral aortic or 
lumbar nodes (para-aortic nodes), which are positioned 
on either side of the abdominal aorta (Fig. 4.168).
As these collections of lymphatics pass through the 
posterior abdominal region, they continue to collect lymph 
from a variety of structures. The lateral aortic or lumbar 
lymph nodes (para-aortic nodes) receive lymphatics from 
the body wall, the kidneys, the suprarenal glands, and the 
testes or ovaries.
The pre-aortic nodes are organized around the three 
anterior branches of the abdominal aorta that supply the 
abdominal part of the gastrointestinal tract, as well as the 
spleen, pancreas, gallbladder, and liver. They are divided 
into celiac, superior mesenteric, and inferior mesenteric 
nodes, and receive lymph from the organs supplied by the 
similarly named arteries.
Finally, the lateral aortic or lumbar nodes form the right 
and left lumbar trunks, whereas the pre-aortic nodes form 
the intestinal trunk (Fig. 4.168). These trunks come 
together and form a confluence that, at times, appears as 
a saccular dilation (the cisterna chyli). This confluence of 
lymph trunks is posterior to the right side of the abdominal 
aorta and anterior to the bodies of vertebrae LI and LII. It 
marks the beginning of the thoracic duct.
In the clinic
Retroperitoneal lymph node surgery
From a clinical perspective, retroperitoneal lymph nodes are 
arranged in two groups. The pre-aortic lymph node group 
drains lymph from the embryological midline structures, 
such as the liver, bowel, and pancreas. The para-aortic 
lymph node group (the lateral aortic or lumbar nodes), on 
either side of the aorta, drain lymph from bilateral structures, 
such as the kidneys and adrenal glands. Organs 
embryologically derived from the posterior abdominal wall 
also drain lymph to these nodes. These organs include the 
ovaries and the testes (importantly, the testes do not drain 
lymph to the inguinal regions).
In general, lymphatic drainage follows standard 
predictable routes; however, in the presence of disease, 
alternate routes of lymphatic drainage will occur.
There are a number of causes for enlarged retroperitoneal 
lymph nodes. In the adult, massively enlarged lymph nodes 
are a feature of lymphoma, and smaller lymph node 
enlargement is observed in the presence of infection and 
metastatic malignant spread of disease (e.g., colon cancer).
The treatment for malignant lymph node disease is based 
upon a number of factors, including the site of the primary 
tumor (e.g., bowel) and its histological cell type. Normally, 
the primary tumor is surgically removed and the lymph 
node spread and metastatic organ spread (e.g., to the liver 
and the lungs) are often treated with chemotherapy and 
radiotherapy.
In certain instances it may be considered appropriate to 
resect the lymph nodes in the retroperitoneum (e.g., for 
testicular cancer).
The surgical approach to retroperitoneal lymph node 
resection involves a lateral paramedian incision in the 
midclavicular line. The three layers of the anterolateral 
abdominal wall (external oblique, internal oblique, and 
transversus abdominis) are opened and the transversalis 
fascia is divided. The next structure the surgeon sees is the 
parietal peritoneum. Instead of entering the parietal 
peritoneum, which is standard procedure for most 
intraabdominal operations, the surgeon gently pushes the 
parietal peritoneum toward the midline, which moves the 
intraabdominal contents and allows a clear view of the 
retroperitoneal structures. On the left, the para-aortic lymph 
node group is easily demonstrated, with a clear view of the 
abdominal aorta and kidney. On the right the inferior vena 
cava is demonstrated and has to be retracted to access the 
right para-aortic lymph node chain.
The procedure of retroperitoneal lymph node dissection 
is extremely well tolerated and lacks the problems of 
entering the peritoneal cavity (e.g., paralytic ileus). 
Unfortunately, a complication of a vertical incision in the 
midclavicular line is division of the segmental nerve supply 
to the rectus abdominis muscle. This produces muscle 
atrophy and asymmetrical proportions of the anterior 
abdominal wall.

=== PAGE 402 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
395
celiac plexus—this subdivision includes nerve fibers 
associated with the roots of the celiac trunk and supe­
rior mesenteric artery.
■	 Continuing inferiorly, the plexus of nerve fibers 
extending from just below the superior mesenteric 
artery to the aortic bifurcation is the abdominal aortic 
plexus (Fig. 4.170).
■	 At the bifurcation of the abdominal aorta, the abdomi­
nal prevertebral plexus continues inferiorly as the 
superior hypogastric plexus.
Abdominal prevertebral plexus and ganglia
The abdominal prevertebral plexus is a network of nerve 
fibers surrounding the abdominal aorta. It extends from 
the aortic hiatus of the diaphragm to the bifurcation of 
the aorta into the right and left common iliac arteries. 
Along its route, it is subdivided into smaller, named plex­
uses (Fig. 4.170):
■	 Beginning at the diaphragm and moving inferiorly, the 
initial accumulation of nerve fibers is referred to as the 
Fig. 4.170  Prevertebral plexus and ganglia in the posterior abdominal region. 
Superior mesenteric ganglion
Inferior mesenteric ganglion
Inferior hypogastric plexus
Sympathetic trunk and ganglion
Lumbar splanchnic nerves
Aorticorenal ganglion
Celiac ganglion
Hypogastric nerve
Prevertebral
plexus
Celiac
plexus
Aortic
plexus
Superior
hypogastric
plexus

=== PAGE 405 ===
Abdomen
398
Lumbar plexus
The lumbar plexus is formed by the anterior rami of nerves 
L1 to L3 and most of the anterior ramus of L4 (Fig. 4.173 
and Table 4.6). It also receives a contribution from the T12 
(subcostal) nerve.
Branches of the lumbar plexus include the iliohypogas­
tric, ilio-inguinal, and genitofemoral nerves, the lateral 
cutaneous nerve of the thigh (lateral femoral cutaneous), 
and femoral and obturator nerves. The lumbar plexus 
forms in the substance of the psoas major muscle anterior 
to its attachment to the transverse processes of the lumbar 
vertebrae (Fig. 4.174). Therefore, relative to the psoas 
major muscle, the various branches emerge either:
■	 anterior—genitofemoral nerve,
■	 medial—obturator nerve, or
■	 lateral—iliohypogastric, ilio-inguinal, and femoral 
nerves and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh.
Iliohypogastric and ilio-inguinal nerves (L1)
The iliohypogastric and ilio-inguinal nerves arise as a 
single trunk from the anterior ramus of nerve L1 (Fig. 
4.173). Either before or soon after emerging from the 
lateral border of the psoas major muscle, this single trunk 
divides into the iliohypogastric and the ilio-inguinal nerves.
Fig. 4.173  Lumbar plexus. 
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
To lumbosacral trunk
Obturator nerve
Femoral
nerve
To iliacus
muscle
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of thigh
Genitofemoral
nerve
Ilio-inguinal nerve
Iliohypogastric
nerve
Table 4.6  Branches of the lumbar plexus
Branch
Origin
Spinal segments
Function: motor
Function: sensory
Iliohypogastric
Anterior ramus L1
L1
Internal oblique and transversus 
abdominis
Posterolateral gluteal skin and skin in 
pubic region
Ilio-inguinal
Anterior ramus L1
L1
Internal oblique and transversus 
abdominis
Skin in the upper medial thigh, and 
either the skin over the root of the penis 
and anterior scrotum or the mons pubis 
and labium majus
Genitofemoral
Anterior rami L1 and L2
L1, L2
Genital branch—male 
cremasteric muscle
Genital branch—skin of anterior scrotum 
or skin of mons pubis and labium majus; 
femoral branch—skin of upper anterior 
thigh
Lateral cutaneous
nerve of thigh
Anterior rami L2 and L3
L2, L3
Skin on anterior and lateral thigh to the 
knee
Obturator
Anterior rami L2 to L4
L2 to L4
Obturator externus, pectineus, 
and muscles in medial 
compartment of thigh
Skin on medial aspect of the thigh
Femoral
Anterior rami L2 to L4
L2 to L4
Iliacus, pectineus, and muscles 
in anterior compartment of 
thigh
Skin on anterior thigh and medial 
surface of leg

=== PAGE 406 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
399
Fig. 4.174  Lumbar plexus in the posterior abdominal region. 
Subcostal nerve
Iliohypogastric nerve
Ilio-inguinal nerve
Lateral cutaneous
 nerve of thigh
Femoral nerve
Genitofemoral nerve
Obturator nerve
Subcostal nerve (T12)
Iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Psoas major muscle
Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)
Lateral cutaneous 
nerve of thigh (L2,L3)
Femoral nerve (L2 to L4)
Genitofemoral nerve (L1,L2)
Iliacus muscle
Obturator nerve (L2 to L4)
Lumbosacral trunks
(L4,L5)

=== PAGE 407 ===
Abdomen
400
Fig. 4.175  Cutaneous distribution of the nerves from the lumbar plexus. 
L1
T12
T12
T12
T11
T11
T10
T10
Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)
Ilio-inguinal nerve (L1)
Genitofemoral nerve (L1,L2)
Lateral cutaneous
 nerve of thigh (L2,L3)
Obturator nerve (L2 to L4)
Cutaneous branch of 
obturator nerve (L2 to L4)
Femoral nerve (L2 to L4)
Lateral cutaneous branch
of iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Anterior cutaneous branch
of iliohypogastric nerve (L1)
Femoral branch of 
genitofemoral nerve (L1,L2)
Lateral cutaneous 
nerve of thigh (L2,L3)
Intermediate cutaneous 
from femoral nerve
Medial cutaneous from
femoral nerve
Saphenous nerve from femoral nerve
Iliohypogastric nerve
The iliohypogastric nerve passes across the anterior 
surface of the quadratus lumborum muscle, posterior to 
the kidney. It pierces the transversus abdominis muscle and 
continues anteriorly around the body between the trans­
versus abdominis and internal oblique muscles. Above the 
iliac crest, a lateral cutaneous branch pierces the 
internal and external oblique muscles to supply the pos­
terolateral gluteal skin (Fig. 4.175).
The remaining part of the iliohypogastric nerve (the 
anterior cutaneous branch) continues in an anterior 
direction, piercing the internal oblique just medial to the 
anterior superior iliac spine as it continues in an obliquely 
downward and medial direction. Becoming cutaneous, just 
above the superficial inguinal ring, after piercing the apo­
neurosis of the external oblique, it distributes to the skin 
in the pubic region (Fig. 4.175). Throughout its course, it 
also supplies branches to the abdominal musculature.
Ilio-inguinal nerve
The ilio-inguinal nerve is smaller than, and inferior to, the 
iliohypogastric nerve as it crosses the quadratus lumborum 

=== PAGE 408 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Posterior Abdominal Region
4
401
muscle. Its course is more oblique than that of the iliohy­
pogastric nerve, and it usually crosses part of the iliacus 
muscle on its way to the iliac crest. Near the anterior end 
of the iliac crest, it pierces the transversus abdominis 
muscle, and then pierces the internal oblique muscle and 
enters the inguinal canal.
The ilio-inguinal nerve emerges through the superficial 
inguinal ring, along with the spermatic cord, and provides 
cutaneous innervation to the upper medial thigh, the 
root of the penis, and the anterior surface of the scrotum 
in men, or the mons pubis and labium majus in women 
(Fig. 4.175). Throughout its course, it also supplies 
branches to the abdominal musculature.
Genitofemoral nerve (L1 and L2)
The genitofemoral nerve arises from the anterior rami of 
nerves L1 and L2 (Fig. 4.173). It passes downward in the 
substance of the psoas major muscle until it emerges on 
the anterior surface of the psoas major. It then descends on 
the surface of the muscle, in a retroperitoneal position, 
passing posterior to the ureter. It eventually divides into 
genital and femoral branches.
The genital branch continues downward and enters 
the inguinal canal through the deep inguinal ring. It con­
tinues through the canal and:
■	 in men, innervates the cremasteric muscle and termi­
nates on the skin in the upper anterior part of the 
scrotum, and
■	 in women, accompanies the round ligament of the 
uterus and terminates on the skin of the mons pubis 
and labium majus.
The femoral branch descends on the lateral side of the 
external iliac artery and passes posterior to the inguinal 
ligament, entering the femoral sheath lateral to the femoral 
artery. It pierces the anterior layer of the femoral sheath 
and the fascia lata to supply the skin of the upper anterior 
thigh (Fig. 4.175).
Lateral cutaneous nerve of  thigh (L2 and L3)
The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh arises from the 
anterior rami of nerves L2 and L3 (Fig. 4.173). It emerges 
from the lateral border of the psoas major muscle, passing 
obliquely downward across the iliacus muscle toward the 
anterior superior iliac spine (Fig. 4.175). It passes posterior 
to the inguinal ligament and enters the thigh.
The lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh supplies the 
skin on the anterior and lateral thigh to the level of the 
knee (Fig. 4.175).
Obturator nerve (L2 to L4)
The obturator nerve arises from the anterior rami of nerves 
L2 to L4 (Fig. 4.173). It descends in the psoas major 
muscle, emerging from its medial side near the pelvic brim 
(Fig. 4.174).
The obturator nerve continues posterior to the common 
iliac vessels, passes across the lateral wall of the pelvic 
cavity, and enters the obturator canal, through which the 
obturator nerve gains access to the medial compartment 
of the thigh.
In the area of the obturator canal, the obturator nerve 
divides into anterior and posterior branches. On enter­
ing the medial compartment of the thigh, the two branches 
are separated by the obturator externus and adductor 
brevis muscles. Throughout their course through the 
medial compartment, these two branches supply:
■	 articular branches to the hip joint,
■	 muscular branches to the obturator externus, pectineus, 
adductor longus, gracilis, adductor brevis, and adduc­
tor magnus muscles,
■	 cutaneous branches to the medial aspect of the 
thigh, and
■	 in association with the saphenous nerve, cutaneous 
branches to the medial aspect of the upper part of the 
leg and articular branches to the knee joint (Fig. 4.175).
Femoral nerve (L2 to L4)
The femoral nerve arises from the anterior rami of nerves 
L2 to L4 (Fig. 4.173). It descends through the substance of 
the psoas major muscle, emerging from the lower lateral 
border of the psoas major (Fig. 4.174). Continuing 
its descent, the femoral nerve lies between the lateral 
border of the psoas major and the anterior surface of the 
iliacus muscle. It is deep to the iliacus fascia and lateral 
to the femoral artery as it passes posterior to the inguinal 
ligament and enters the anterior compartment of the 
thigh. Upon entering the thigh, it immediately divides into 
multiple branches.
Cutaneous branches of the femoral nerve include:
■	 medial and intermediate cutaneous nerves supplying 
the skin on the anterior surface of the thigh, and
■	 the saphenous nerve supplying the skin on the medial 
surface of the leg (Fig. 4.175).
Muscular branches innervate the iliacus, pectineus, 
sartorius, rectus femoris, vastus medialis, vastus interme­
dius, and vastus lateralis muscles. Articular branches 
supply the hip and knee joints.

=== PAGE 409 ===
Abdomen
402
Fig. 4.176  Interior view of the abdominal region of a man. Palpable bony landmarks, the inguinal ligament, and the position of the diaphragm 
are indicated. 
Diaphragm
Thorax
Abdomen
Lower limb
Costal margin
Anterior superior iliac spine
Iliac crest
Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercle
Surface anatomy
Abdomen surface anatomy
Visualization of the position of abdominal viscera is funda­
mental to a physical examination. Some of these viscera or 
their parts can be felt by palpating through the abdominal 
wall. Surface features can be used to establish the positions 
of deep structures.
Defining the surface projection 
of the abdomen
Palpable landmarks can be used to delineate the extent 
of the abdomen on the surface of the body. These land­
marks are:
■	 the costal margin above and
■	 the pubic tubercle, anterior superior iliac spine, and iliac 
crest below (Fig. 4.176).
The costal margin is readily palpable and separates the 
abdominal wall from the thoracic wall.
A line between the anterior superior iliac spine and the 
pubic tubercle marks the position of the inguinal ligament, 
which separates the anterior abdominal wall above from 
the thigh of the lower limb below.
The iliac crest separates the posterolateral abdominal 
wall from the gluteal region of the lower limb.
The upper part of the abdominal cavity projects above 
the costal margin to the diaphragm, and therefore abdomi­
nal viscera in this region of the abdomen are protected by 
the thoracic wall.
The level of the diaphragm varies during the breathing 
cycle. The dome of the diaphragm on the right can reach 
as high as the fourth costal cartilage during forced 
expiration.

=== PAGE 410 ===
4
403
Surface Anatomy  •  How to Find the Superficial Inguinal Ring
Fig. 4.177  Groin. A. In a man. B. In a woman. C. Examination of the superficial inguinal ring and related regions of the inguinal canal in 
a man. 
Deep inguinal ring
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Aponeurosis of external oblique
Superficial inguinal ring
Position of pubic symphysis
A
B
C
Anterior superior iliac spine
Spermatic cord
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery
Deep inguinal ring
Superficial inguinal ring
Position of pubic symphysis
Anterior superior iliac spine
Round ligament of uterus
Inguinal ligament
Femoral artery
How to find the superficial inguinal ring
The superficial inguinal ring is an elongate triangular 
defect in the aponeurosis of the external oblique (Fig. 
4.177). It lies in the lower medial aspect of the anterior 
abdominal wall and is the external opening of the inguinal 
canal. The inguinal canal and superficial ring are larger in 
men than in women:
■	 In men, structures that pass between the abdomen and 
the testis pass through the inguinal canal and superficial 
inguinal ring.

=== PAGE 411 ===
Abdomen
404
Fig. 4.178  Landmarks used for establishing the positions of lumbar vertebrae are indicated. Anterior view of the abdominal region of a man. 
End of ninth costal cartilage
Lower edge of tenth
costal cartilage
Highest point on iliac crest
LI
LII
LIII
LIV
LV
Pubic symphysis
Tubercle of crest of ilium
Jugular notch
Transpyloric plane
Subcostal plane
Supracristal plane
Intertubercular plane
Umbilicus
9
10
■	 In women, the round ligament of the uterus passes 
through the inguinal canal and superficial inguinal ring 
to merge with connective tissue of the labium majus.
The superficial inguinal ring is superior to the pubic 
crest and tubercle and to the medial end of the inguinal 
ligament:
■	 In men, the superficial inguinal ring can be easily 
located by following the spermatic cord superiorly to the 
lower abdominal wall—the external spermatic fascia of 
the spermatic cord is continuous with the margins of 
the superficial inguinal ring.
■	 In women, the pubic tubercle can be palpated and the 
ring is superior and lateral to it.
The deep inguinal ring, which is the internal opening to 
the inguinal canal, lies superior to the inguinal ligament, 
midway between the anterior superior iliac spine and pubic 
symphysis. The pulse of the femoral artery can be felt in 
the same position but below the inguinal ligament.
Because the superficial inguinal ring is the site where 
inguinal hernias appear, particularly in men, the ring and 
related parts of the inguinal canal are often evaluated 
during physical examination.
How to determine lumbar vertebral levels
Lumbar vertebral levels are useful for visualizing the posi­
tions of viscera and major blood vessels. The approximate 
positions of the lumbar vertebrae can be established using 
palpable or visible landmarks (Fig. 4.178):
■	 A horizontal plane passes through the medial ends of 
the ninth costal cartilages and the body of the LI 
vertebra—this transpyloric plane cuts through the body 
midway between the suprasternal (jugular) notch and 
the pubic symphysis.

=== PAGE 414 ===
4
407
Surface Anatomy  •  Using Abdominal Quadrants to Locate Major Viscera
Fig. 4.181  Abdominal quadrants and the positions of major viscera. Anterior view of a man. 
Spleen
Stomach
Sigmoid colon
Descending colon
Sagittal plane
Transumbilical plane
Liver
Diaphragm
Costal margin
Gallbladder
Anterior superior iliac spine
McBurney's point
Appendix
Inguinal ligament
Pubic tubercle
Using abdominal quadrants to locate 
major viscera
The abdomen can be divided into quadrants by a vertical 
median plane and a horizontal transumbilical plane, which 
passes through the umbilicus (Fig. 4.181):
■	 The liver and gallbladder are in the right upper quadrant.
■	 The stomach and spleen are in the left upper quadrant.
■	 The cecum and appendix are in the right lower quadrant.
■	 The end of the descending colon and sigmoid colon are 
in the left lower quadrant.
Most of the liver is under the right dome of the dia­
phragm and is deep to the lower thoracic wall. The inferior 
margin of the liver can be palpated descending below the 
right costal margin when a patient is asked to inhale deeply. 
On deep inspiration, the edge of the liver can be felt 
“slipping” under the palpating fingers placed under the 
costal margin.
A common surface projection of the appendix is 
McBurney’s point, which is one-third of the way up along 
a line from the right anterior superior iliac spine to the 
umbilicus.

=== PAGE 415 ===
Abdomen
408
Fig. 4.182  The nine regions of the abdomen. Anterior view of a woman. 
Intertubercular plane
Subcostal plane
Midclavicular planes
Umbilical region
–referred pain from midgut
Pubic region
–referred pain from hindgut
Epigastric region
–referred pain from foregut
Anterior superior iliac spine
Inguinal ligament
Right
groin
Right
hypochondrium
Right
flank
Left
hypochondrium
Left
flank
Left
groin
Pubic tubercle
Defining surface regions to which pain 
from the gut is referred
The abdomen can be divided into nine regions by a midcla­
vicular sagittal plane on each side and by the subcostal 
and intertubercular planes, which pass through the 
body transversely (Fig. 4.182). These planes separate the 
abdomen into:
■	 three central regions (epigastric, umbilical, pubic), and
■	 three regions on each side (hypochondrium, flank, 
groin).
Pain from the abdominal part of the foregut is referred 
to the epigastric region, pain from the midgut is referred to 
the umbilical region, and pain from the hindgut is referred 
to the pubic region.

=== PAGE 417 ===
Abdomen
410
Case 2
Case 1
CHRONIC THROMBOSIS OF THE INFERIOR VENA CAVA
A medical student was asked to inspect the abdomen of 
two patients. On the first patient he noted irregular veins 
radiating from the umbilicus. On the second patient he 
noted irregular veins, coursing in a caudal to cranial 
direction, over the anterior abdominal wall from the groin 
to the chest. He was asked to explain his findings and 
determine the significance of these features.
In the first patient the veins were draining radially away 
from the periumbilical region. In normal individuals, enlarged 
veins do not radiate from the umbilicus. In patients with 
portal hypertension the portal venous pressure is increased 
as a result of hepatic disease. Small collateral veins develop 
at and around the obliterated umbilical vein. These veins 
pass through the umbilicus and drain onto the anterior 
abdominal wall, forming a portosystemic anastomosis. The 
eventual diagnosis for this patient was cirrhosis of the liver.
The finding of veins draining in a caudocranial direction on 
the anterior abdominal wall in the second patient is not 
typical for veins on the anterior abdominal wall. When veins 
are so prominent, it usually implies that there is an 
obstruction to the normal route of venous drainage and an 
alternative route has been taken. Typically, blood from the 
lower limbs and the retroperitoneal organs drains into 
the inferior vena cava and from here to the right atrium of 
the heart. This patient had a chronic thrombosis of the 
inferior vena cava, preventing blood from returning to the 
heart by the “usual” route.
Blood from the lower limbs and the pelvis may drain via a 
series of collateral vessels, some of which include the 
superficial inferior epigastric veins, which run in the 
superficial fascia. These anastomose with the superior, 
superficial, and deep epigastric venous systems to drain into 
the internal thoracic veins, which in turn drain into the 
brachiocephalic veins and the superior vena cava.
After the initial inferior vena cava thrombosis, the veins of 
the anterior abdominal wall and other collateral pathways 
hypertrophy to accommodate the increase in blood flow.
TRAUMATIC RUPTURE OF THE DIAPHRAGM
A 45-year-old man had mild epigastric pain, and a diagnosis 
of esophageal reflux was made. He was given appropriate 
medication, which worked well. However, at the time of the 
initial consultation, the family practitioner requested a 
chest radiograph, which demonstrated a prominent hump 
on the left side of the diaphragm and old rib fractures.
The patient was recalled for further questioning.
He was extremely pleased with the treatment he had been 
given for his gastroesophageal reflux, but was concerned 
about being recalled for further history and examination. 
During the interview, he revealed that he had previously 
been involved in a motorcycle accident and had undergone a 
laparotomy for a “rupture.” The patient did not recall what 
operation was performed, but was assured at the time that 
the operation was a great success.
The patient is likely to have undergone a splenectomy.
In any patient who has had severe blunt abdominal trauma 
(such as that caused by a motorcycle accident), lower 
left-sided rib fractures are an extremely important sign of 
appreciable trauma.
A review of the patient’s old notes revealed that at the time 
of the injury the spleen was removed surgically, but it was 
not appreciated that there was a small rupture of the dome 
of the left hemidiaphragm. The patient gradually developed 
a hernia through which bowel could enter, producing the 
“hump” on the diaphragm seen on the chest radiograph.
Because this injury occurred many years ago and the patient 
has been asymptomatic, it is unlikely that the patient will 
come to any harm and was discharged.
Clinical cases

=== PAGE 419 ===
Abdomen
412
Case 4
METASTATIC LESIONS IN THE LIVER
A 44-year-old woman had been recently diagnosed with 
melanoma on the toe and underwent a series 
of investigations.
Melanoma (properly called malignant melanoma) can be an 
aggressive form of skin cancer that spreads to lymph nodes 
and multiple other organs throughout the body. The 
malignant potential is dependent upon its cellular 
configuration and also the depth of its penetration through 
the skin.
The patient developed malignant melanoma in the foot, 
which spread to the lymph nodes of the groin. The 
inguinal lymph nodes were resected; however, it was 
noted on follow-up imaging that the patient had 
developed two metastatic lesions within the right lobe 
of the liver.
Surgeons and physicians considered the possibility of 
removing these lesions.
A CT scan was performed that demonstrated the lesions 
within segments V and VI of the liver (Fig. 4.186).
The segmental anatomy of the liver is important because it 
enables the surgical planning for resection.
The surgery was undertaken and involved identifying 
the portal vein and the confluence of the right and left 
hepatic ducts. The liver was divided in the imaginary 
principal plane of the middle hepatic vein. The main hepatic 
duct and biliary radicals were ligated and the right liver was 
successfully resected.
The segments remaining included the left lobe of 
the liver.
The patient underwent a surgical resection of segments V, 
VI, VII, and VIII. The remaining segments included IVa, IVb, I, 
II, and III. It is important to remember that the lobes of the 
liver do not correlate with the hepatic volume. The left lobe 
of the liver contains only segments II and III. The right lobe 
of the liver contains segments IV, V, VI, VII, and VIII. Hence, 
cross-sectional imaging is important when planning surgical 
segmental resection.
Fig. 4.186  This postcontrast computed tomogram, in the axial 
plane, demonstrates two metastases situated within the right 
lobe of the liver. The left lobe of the liver is clear. The larger of 
the two metastases is situated to the right of the middle hepatic 
vein, which lies in the principal plane of the liver dividing the 
left and right sides of the liver. 
Middle hepatic vein
Hepatic metastasis

=== PAGE 421 ===
Abdomen
412.e2
Case 6
HODGKIN’S LYMPHOMA
A 30-year-old man had a diffuse and poorly defined 
epigastric mass. Further examination revealed 
asymmetrical scrotal enlargement.
As part of her differential diagnosis, the resident considered 
the possibility that the man had testicular cancer with 
regional abdominal para-aortic nodal involvement (the lateral 
aortic, or lumbar, nodes).
A primary testicular neoplasm is the most common tumor in 
men between the ages of 25 and 34 and accounts for 
between 1% and 2% of all malignancies in men. A family 
history of testicular cancer and maldescent of the testis are 
strong predisposing factors.
Spread of the tumor is typically to the lymph node chains 
that drain the testes.
The testes develop from structures adjacent to the renal 
vessels in the upper abdomen, between the transversalis 
fascia and the peritoneum. They normally migrate through 
the inguinal canals into the scrotum just before birth. The 
testes take with them their arterial supply, their venous 
drainage, their nerve supply, and their lymphatics.
A computed tomography scan revealed a para-aortic lymph 
node mass in the upper abdomen and enlarged lymph 
nodes throughout the internal and common iliac lymph 
node chains.
Assuming the scrotal mass was a carcinoma of the testes, 
which would normally drain into the lateral aortic (lumbar) 
nodes in the upper abdomen, it would be very unusual for 
iliac lymphadenopathy to be present.
Further examination of the scrotal mass was required.
A transillumination test of the scrotum on the affected side 
was positive. An ultrasound scan revealed normal right and 
left testes and a large fluid collection around the right testis. 
A diagnosis of a right-sided hydrocele was made.
Scrotal masses are common in young males, and 
determining the exact anatomical site of the scrotal mass is 
of utmost clinical importance. Any mass that arises from the 
testis should be investigated to exclude testicular cancer. 
Masses that arise from the epididymis and scrotal lesions, 
such as fluid (hydrocele) or hernias, are also clinically 
important but are not malignant.
The ultrasound scan revealed fluid surrounding the testis, 
which is diagnostic of a hydrocele. Simple cysts arising from 
and around the epididymis (epididymal cysts) can be easily 
defined.
A diagnosis of lymphoma was suspected.
Lymphoma is a malignant disease of lymph nodes. Most 
lymphomas are divided into two specific types, namely 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. If 
caught early the prognosis following radical chemotherapy is 
excellent.
The patient underwent a biopsy, which was performed from 
the posterior approach. He was placed in the prone position 
in the computed tomography (CT) scanner. A fine needle with 
a special cutting device was used to obtain a lymph node 
sample. A left-sided approach was used because the inferior 
vena cava is on the right side and the nodes were in the 
para-aortic regions (i.e., the biopsy needle would have to pass 
between the inferior vena cava and the aorta from a posterior 
approach, which is difficult). The skin was anesthetized 
using local anesthetic at the lateral border of the quadratus 
lumborum muscle. The needle was angled at approximately 
45° within the quadratus lumborum muscle and entered 
the retroperitoneum to lie beside the left-sided para-aortic 
lymph nodes. Because this procedure is performed using CT 
guidance, the operator can advance the needle slowly, taking 
care not to “hit” other retroperitoneal structures.
A good biopsy was obtained and the diagnosis was 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The patient underwent chemotherapy 
and 2 years later is in full remission and leads an active life.

=== PAGE 422 ===
Clinical Cases  •  Case 8
4
412.e3
Case 7
INGUINAL HERNIA
A 35-year-old man had a soft mass approximately 3 cm in 
diameter in the right scrotum. The diagnosis was a right 
indirect inguinal hernia.
What were the examination findings?
The mass was not tender and the physician was not able to 
“get above it.” The testes were felt separate from the mass, 
and a transillumination test (in which a bright light is placed 
behind the scrotum and the scrotal sac is viewed from the 
front) was negative. (A positive test occurs when the light 
penetrates through the scrotum.)
When the patient stood up, a positive cough “impulse” was 
felt within the mass.
After careful and delicate maneuvering, the mass could be 
massaged into the inguinal canal, so emptying from the 
scrotum. When the massaging hand was removed, the mass 
recurred in the scrotum.
An indirect inguinal hernia enters the inguinal canal through 
the deep inguinal ring. It passes through the inguinal canal 
to exit through the superficial inguinal ring in the 
aponeurosis of the external oblique muscle. The hernia sac 
lies superior and medial to the pubic tubercle and enters into 
the scrotum within the spermatic cord.
A direct inguinal hernia passes directly through the posterior 
wall of the inguinal canal. It does not pass down the inguinal 
canal. If large enough, it may pass through the superficial 
inguinal ring and into the scrotum.
Case 8
URETERIC STONE
A 25-year-old man developed severe pain in the left lower 
quadrant of his abdomen. The pain was diffuse and 
relatively constant but did ease for short periods of time. 
On direct questioning the patient indicated that the pain 
was in the inguinal region and radiated posteriorly into his 
left infrascapular region (loin). A urine dipstick was positive 
for blood (hematuria).
A diagnosis of a ureteric stone (calculus) was made.
The patient’s initial infrascapular pain, which later radiated 
to the left groin, relates to passage of the ureteric stone 
along the ureter.
The origin of the pain relates to ureteral distention.
A series of peristaltic waves along the ureter transport urine 
along the length of the ureter from the kidney to the 
bladder. As the ureteric stone obstructs the kidney, the 
ureter becomes distended, resulting in an exacerbation of 
the pain. The peristaltic waves are superimposed upon the 
distention, resulting in periods of exacerbation and periods 
of relief.
The pain is referred.
The visceral afferent (sensory) nerve fibers from the ureter 
pass into the spinal cord, entering the first and second 
lumbar segments of the spinal cord. Pain is thus referred to 
cutaneous regions innervated by somatic sensory nerves 
from the same spinal cord levels.
The patient was investigated by a CT scan.
Traditionally, a plain radiograph was used to look for the 
radiopaque stone (90% of renal stones are radiopaque) and 
this often proceeded to intravenous urography to determine 
precise location of renal stones. Currently, low-dose CT of 
the collecting system is used to visualize the renal stones 
and pinpoint the level of obstruction, using low radiation 
dose and no intravenous contrast.
An ultrasound scan may also be useful to assess for 
pelvicaliceal dilation and may reveal stones at the 
pelviureteral junction or the vesicoureteric junction. 
Ultrasound is also valuable for assessing other causes of 
obstruction (e.g., tumors at and around the ureteric orifices 
in the bladder) and is particularly useful in pregnant women 
when imaging with the use of radiation is a concern.
Usually an intravenous urogram would be carried out to 
enable assessment of the upper urinary tracts and precise 
location of the stone.
Not infrequently, CT scans of the abdomen are also 
obtained. These scans not only give information about the 
kidneys, ureters, and bladder but also show the position of 
the stone and other associated pathology.
If this patient’s infrascapular pain was on the right and 
predominantly within the right lower abdomen, appendicitis 
would also have to be excluded. A CT scan would enable 
differentiation of appendicitis and urinary colic.

=== PAGE 423 ===
Abdomen
412.e4
Case 9
INTRAABDOMINAL ABSCESS
A 27-year-old woman was admitted to the surgical ward 
with appendicitis. She underwent an appendectomy. It was 
noted at operation that the appendix had perforated and 
there was pus within the abdominal cavity. The appendix 
was removed and the stump tied. The abdomen was 
washed out with warm saline solution. The patient initially 
made an uneventful recovery, but by day 7 she had become 
unwell, with pain over her right shoulder and spiking 
temperatures.
This patient had developed an intraabdominal abscess.
Any operation on the bowel may involve peritoneal 
contamination with fecal contents and fecal flora. This may 
not be appreciated at the time of the operation.
Over the postoperative period an inflammatory reaction 
ensued and an abscess cavity developed, filling with pus. 
Typically, the observation chart revealed a “swinging” 
pyrexia (fever).
The most common sites for abscess to develop are the 
pelvis and the hepatorenal recess.
When a patient is in the supine position, the lowest points in 
the abdominal and pelvic cavities are the posterior superior 
aspect of the peritoneal cavity (the hepatorenal recess) and, 
in women, the recto-uterine pouch (pouch of Douglas).
The shoulder pain suggested that the abscess was in the 
hepatorenal recess and that the pain was referred from the 
diaphragm.
The motor and sensory innervation of the diaphragm is from 
nerves C3 to C5. The somatic pain sensation from the 
parietal peritoneum covering the undersurface of the 
diaphragm is carried into the spinal cord by the phrenic 
nerve (C3 to C5) and is interpreted by the brain as coming 
from skin over the shoulder—a region supplied by other 
somatic sensory nerves entering the same levels of the 
spinal cord as those from the diaphragm.
A chest radiograph demonstrated elevation of the right 
hemidiaphragm.
This elevation of the right hemidiaphragm was due to the 
pus tracking from the hepatorenal space around the lateral 
and anterior aspect of the liver to sit on top of the liver in a 
subphrenic position. An ultrasound scan demonstrated this 
collection of fluid. The abscess cavity could be clearly seen 
by placing the ultrasound probe between ribs XI and XII. The 
inferior border of the right lower lobe lies at rib X in the 
midaxillary line. When the probe is placed between ribs XI 
and XII the ultrasound waves pass between the intercostal 
muscles and the parietal pleura laterally on the chest wall, 
and continue through the parietal pleura overlying the 
diaphragm into the cavity of the abscess, which lies below 
the diaphragm.
Drainage was not done by an intercostal route. Instead, using 
CT guidance and local anesthesia, a subcostal drain was 
established and 1 liter of pus was removed (eFig. 4.188). It is 
important to bear in mind that placing a drain through the 
pleural cavity into the abdominal cavity effectively allows 
intraabdominal pus to pass into the thoracic cavity, and that 
this may produce an empyema (pus in the pleural space).
The patient made a slow and uneventful recovery.
eFig. 4.188  Subphrenic collection of pus and gas. Computed 
tomogram in the axial plane. 
Subphrenic collection of pus and gas
