=== PAGE 644 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
627
In the clinic
Footdrop
Footdrop is an inability to dorsiflex the foot. Patients with 
footdrop have a characteristic “steppage” gait. As the 
patient walks, the knee of the affected limb is elevated to 
an abnormal height during the swing phase to prevent the 
foot from dragging. At the end of the swing phase, the 
foot “slaps” the ground. Also, the unaffected limb often 
acquires a characteristic tiptoe pattern of gait during the 
stance phase. A typical cause of footdrop is damage to the 
common fibular nerve, which may occur with fractures of 
the fibular neck. Other causes include disc protrusion 
compressing the L5 nerve root, disorders of the sciatic 
nerve and the lumbosacral plexus, and pathologies of the 
spinal cord and brain.
FOOT
The foot is the region of the lower limb distal to the ankle 
joint. It is subdivided into the ankle, the metatarsus, and 
the digits.
There are five digits consisting of the medially 
positioned great toe (digit I) and four more laterally 
placed digits, ending laterally with the little toe (digit V) 
(Fig. 6.95).
The foot has a superior surface (dorsum of  foot) and 
an inferior surface (sole; Fig. 6.95).
Abduction and adduction of the toes are defined with 
respect to the long axis of the second digit. Unlike in the 
hand, where the thumb is oriented 90° to the other fingers, 
the great toe is oriented in the same position as the other 
toes. The foot is the body’s point of contact with the ground 
and provides a stable platform for upright stance. It also 
levers the body forward during walking.
In the clinic
Common fibular nerve injury
The common fibular nerve is susceptible to injury as it 
passes around the lateral aspect of the neck of the fibula. 
It can be injured as a result of a direct trauma (blow or 
laceration), secondary to knee injury (knee dislocation), or 
as a consequence of a proximal fibular fracture. 
Sometimes damage to the nerve can be iatrogenic, that is, 
damaged during arthroscopy or knee surgery.
Symptoms of common fibular nerve injury are often 
observed in bed-bound patients, particularly in those with 
decreased levels of consciousness, due to prolonged 
external pressure to the knee leading to nerve 
compression and neuropathy. Similarly, application of a 
tight cast or a brace to the leg can compress the nerve, 
producing symptoms of fibular muscle palsy.
Apart from a foot drop, other symptoms of common 
fibular nerve injury include loss of sensation over the 
lateral aspect of the leg and dorsum of the foot, and 
wasting of fibular and anterior tibial muscles.

=== PAGE 645 ===
Lower Limb
628
Fig. 6.95  Foot. A. Dorsal aspect, right foot. B. Plantar aspect, right foot, showing the surface in contact with the ground when standing. 
Abduction
Adduction
Great toe
Digit I
Digit II
Digit III
Digit IV
Digit V
Phalanges
Little toe
Metatarsals (I–V)
Tarsal bones
A
B
Cut surface of medial
malleolus (tibia)
Cut surface of lateral
malleolus (fibula)
Calcaneal tendon
Medial malleolus
Lateral malleolus
Heel
Sesamoid bones

=== PAGE 646 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
629
Tarsal bones
The tarsal bones are arranged in a proximal group and a 
distal group with an intermediate bone between the two 
groups on the medial side of the foot (Fig. 6.96A).
Proximal group
The proximal group consists of two large bones, the talus 
(Latin for “ankle”) and the calcaneus (Latin for “heel”):
Bones
There are three groups of bones in the foot (Fig. 6.96):
■	 the seven tarsal bones, which form the skeletal frame­
work for the ankle;
■	 metatarsals (I to V), which are the bones of the meta­
tarsus; and
■	 the phalanges, which are the bones of the toes—each 
toe has three phalanges, except for the great toe, which 
has two.
Fig. 6.96  Bones of the foot. A. Dorsal view, right foot. B. Lateral view, right foot. 
Talus
Posterior
process
of the talus
B
Calcaneus
Fibular trochlea
Groove
Cuboid
Medial tubercle
Cuneiforms
Navicular
Phalanges
Metatarsals
Navicular
Intermediate
tarsal bone
Tuberosity (on undersurface)
Calcaneus
Talus
Lateral process
Lateral
tubercle
Groove for tendon of
flexor hallucis longus
Proximal group
of tarsal bones
Medial
Intermediate
Lateral
Cuneiforms
Distal group
of tarsal bones
Cuboid
Distal
Middle
Proximal
A

=== PAGE 647 ===
Lower Limb
630
The neck of the talus is marked by a deep groove (the 
sulcus tali), which passes obliquely forward across the 
inferior surface from medial to lateral, and expands dra­
matically on the lateral side. Posterior to the sulcus tali is 
a large facet (posterior calcaneal surface) for articulation 
with the calcaneus.
The superior aspect of the body of the talus is elevated 
to fit into the socket formed by the distal ends of the tibia 
and fibula to form the ankle joint:
■	 The upper (trochlear) surface of this elevated region 
articulates with the inferior end of the tibia.
■	 The medial surface articulates with the medial malleo­
lus of the tibia.
■	 The lateral surface articulates with the lateral malleolus 
of the fibula.
Because the lateral malleolus is larger and projects more 
inferiorly than the medial malleolus at the ankle joint, the 
corresponding lateral articular surface on the talus is 
larger and projects more inferiorly than the medial surface.
The lower part of the lateral surface of the body of the 
talus, which supports the lower part of the facet for articu­
lation with the fibula, forms a bony projection (the lateral 
process).
The inferior surface of the body of the talus has a large 
oval concave facet (the posterior calcaneal articular 
facet) for articulation with the calcaneus.
The posterior aspect of the body of the talus consists of 
a backward and medially facing projection (the posterior 
process). The posterior process is marked on its surface by 
■	 The talus is the most superior bone of the foot and sits 
on top of and is supported by the calcaneus (Fig. 
6.96B)—it articulates above with the tibia and fibula to 
form the ankle joint and also projects forward to articu­
late with the intermediate tarsal bone (navicular) on the 
medial side of the foot.
■	 The calcaneus is the largest of the tarsal bones—
posteriorly it forms the bony framework of the heel and 
anteriorly it projects forward to articulate with one of 
the distal group of tarsal bones (cuboid) on the lateral 
side of the foot.
Talus
The talus, when viewed from the medial or lateral sides, is 
snail-shaped (Fig. 6.97A,B). It has a rounded head, which 
is projected forward and medially at the end of a short 
broad neck, which is connected posteriorly to an expanded 
body.
Anteriorly, the head of the talus is domed for articula­
tion with a corresponding circular depression on the pos­
terior surface of the navicular bone. Inferiorly, this domed 
articular surface is continuous with an additional three 
articular facets separated by smooth ridges:
■	 The anterior and middle facets articulate with adjacent 
surfaces on the calcaneus bone.
■	 The other facet, medial to the facets for articulation with 
the calcaneus, articulates with a ligament—the plantar 
calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament)—which 
connects the calcaneus to the navicular under the head 
of the talus.
Fig. 6.97  Talus. A. Medial view. B. Inferior view. 
A
B
Posterior
 Anterior
Articular surface
for navicular
Articular surface
for navicular
Neck
Head
Body
Anterior
Posterior
Articular surface with
medial malleolus
Medial
tubercle
Lateral
tubercle
Groove for flexor
hallucis longus
Groove for flexor
hallucis longus
Articular surface with
distal end of tibia
Anterior calcaneal
surface
Middle calcaneal
surface
Sulcus tali
Posterior process
of talus
Posterior
calcaneal surface
Articular surface for
calcaneonavicular
ligament

=== PAGE 648 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
631
tubercle (the calcaneal tubercle) for the posterior attach­
ment of the short plantar ligament of the sole of the foot.
The lateral surface of the calcaneus has a smooth 
contour except for two slightly raised regions (Fig. 6.98C). 
One of these raised areas—the fibular trochlea (peroneal 
tubercle)—is anterior to the middle of the surface and 
often has two shallow grooves, which pass, one above the 
other, obliquely across its surface. The tendons of the fibu­
laris brevis and longus muscles are bound to the trochlea 
as they pass over the lateral side of the calcaneus.
Superior and posterior to the fibular trochlea is a second 
raised area or tubercle for attachment of the calcaneofibu­
lar part of the lateral collateral ligament of the ankle joint.
The medial surface of the calcaneus is concave and has 
one prominent feature associated with its upper margin 
(the sustentaculum tali; Fig. 6.98A), which is a shelf of 
bone projecting medially and supporting the more poste­
rior part of the head of the talus.
The underside of the sustentaculum tali has a distinct 
groove running from posterior to anterior and along which 
the tendon of the flexor hallucis longus muscle travels into 
the sole of the foot.
The superior surface of the sustentaculum tali has 
a facet (middle talar articular surface) for articulation 
with the corresponding middle facet on the head of 
the talus.
a lateral tubercle and a medial tubercle, which bracket 
between them the groove for  the tendon of  the flexor 
hallucis longus as it passes from the leg into the foot.
Calcaneus
The calcaneus sits under and supports the talus. It is an 
elongate, irregular, box-shaped bone with its long axis 
generally oriented along the midline of the foot, but deviat­
ing lateral to the midline anteriorly (Fig. 6.98).
The calcaneus projects behind the ankle joint to form 
the skeletal framework of the heel. The posterior surface of 
this heel region is circular and divided into upper, middle, 
and lower parts. The calcaneal tendon (Achilles tendon) 
attaches to the middle part:
■	 The upper part is separated from the calcaneal tendon 
by a bursa.
■	 The lower part curves forward, is covered by subcutane­
ous tissue, is the weight-bearing region of the heel, and 
is continuous onto the plantar surface of the bone as the 
calcaneal tuberosity.
The calcaneal tuberosity projects forward on the plantar 
surface as a large medial process and a small lateral process 
separated from each other by a V-shaped notch (Fig. 
6.98B). At the anterior end of the plantar surface is a 
Fig. 6.98  Calcaneus. A. Superior view. B. Inferior view. C. Lateral view. 
A
B
C
Anterior talar articular surface
Posterior talar
articular surface
Posterior talar
articular surface
Anterior talar
articular surface
Middle talar
articular surface
Middle talar
articular surface
Sustentaculum tali
Medial
Medial
Middle part of posterior surface
(insertion of calcaneal tendon)
Upper part of
posterior surface
Lateral
Calcaneal
sulcus
Articular surface with cuboid bone
Calcaneal
tubercle
Lateral
process
Notch
Calcaneal tuberosity
(lower part of posterior surface)
Medial
process
Groove for tendon of
flexor hallucis longus
Attachment of calcaneofibular
part of lateral collateral ligament
of ankle joint
Fibular trochlea
Calcaneal sulcus

=== PAGE 649 ===
Lower Limb
632
Anterior and posterior talar articular surfaces are 
on the superior surface of the calcaneus itself (Fig. 6.98A):
■	 The anterior talar articular surface is small and articu­
lates with the corresponding anterior facet on the head 
of the talus.
■	 The posterior talar articular surface is large and is 
approximately near the middle of the superior surface 
of the calcaneus.
Between the posterior talar articular surface, which 
articulates with the body of the talus, and the other two 
articular surfaces, which articulate with the head of 
the talus, is a deep groove (the calcaneal sulcus; Fig. 
6.98A,C).
The calcaneal sulcus on the superior surface of the 
calcaneus and the sulcus tali on the inferior surface of the 
talus together form the tarsal sinus, which is a large gap 
between the anterior ends of the calcaneus and talus that 
is visible when the skeleton of the foot is viewed from its 
lateral aspect (Fig. 6.99).
Intermediate tarsal bone
The intermediate tarsal bone on the medial side of the foot 
is the navicular (boat shaped) (Fig. 6.96). This bone 
articulates behind with the talus and articulates in front 
and on the lateral side with the distal group of tarsal bones.
One distinctive feature of the navicular is a prominent 
rounded tuberosity for the attachment of the tibialis pos­
terior tendon, which projects inferiorly on the medial side 
of the plantar surface of the bone.
Distal group
From lateral to medial, the distal group of tarsal bones 
consists of (Fig. 6.96):
■	 The cuboid (Greek for “cube”), which articulates pos­
teriorly with the calcaneus, medially with the lateral 
cuneiform, and anteriorly with the bases of the lateral 
two metatarsals—the tendon of the fibularis longus 
muscle lies in a prominent groove on the anterior 
plantar surface, which passes obliquely forward across 
the bone from lateral to medial.
■	 Three cuneiforms (Latin for “wedge”)—the lateral, 
intermediate, and medial cuneiform bones, in addi­
tion to articulating with each other, articulate posteri­
orly with the navicular bone and anteriorly with the 
bases of the medial three metatarsals.
Metatarsals
There are five metatarsals in the foot, numbered I to V from 
medial to lateral (Fig. 6.100). Metatarsal I, associated with 
Fig. 6.99  Tarsal sinus. Lateral view, right foot. 
Tarsal sinus
Fig. 6.100  Metatarsals and phalanges. Dorsal view, right foot. 
Distal
phalanx
Phalanges
Proximal
phalanx
Proximal phalanx
Middle phalanx
Distal phalanx
Sesamoid
bones
(on plantar
surface)
Metatarsals
Tuberosity
I
II
III
IV
V
the great toe, is shortest and thickest. The second is the 
longest.
Each metatarsal has a head at the distal end, an elon­
gate shaft in the middle, and a proximal base.
The head of each metatarsal articulates with the proxi­
mal phalanx of a toe and the base articulates with one or 
more of the distal group of tarsal bones. The plantar 

=== PAGE 650 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
633
except for the great toe, which has only two (proximal 
and distal).
Each phalanx consists of a base, a shaft, and a distal 
head:
■	 The base of each proximal phalanx articulates with the 
head of the related metatarsal.
■	 The head of each distal phalanx is nonarticular and 
flattened into a crescent-shaped plantar tuberosity 
under the plantar pad at the end of the digit.
In each toe, the total length of the phalanges combined 
is much shorter than the length of the associated 
metatarsal.
Joints
Ankle joint
The ankle joint is synovial in type and involves the 
talus of the foot and the tibia and fibula of the leg 
(Fig. 6.102).
The ankle joint mainly allows hinge-like dorsiflexion 
and plantarflexion of the foot on the leg.
The distal end of the fibula is firmly anchored to the 
larger distal end of the tibia by strong ligaments. Together, 
the fibula and tibia create a deep bracket-shaped socket for 
the upper expanded part of the body of the talus:
■	 The roof of the socket is formed by the inferior surface 
of the distal end of the tibia.
■	 The medial side of the socket is formed by the medial 
malleolus of the tibia.
■	 The longer lateral side of the socket is formed by the 
lateral malleolus of the fibula.
The articular surfaces are covered by hyaline cartilage.
The articular part of the talus is shaped like a short 
half-cylinder tipped onto its flat side with one end facing 
lateral and the other end facing medial. The curved upper 
surface of the half-cylinder and the two ends are covered 
by hyaline cartilage and fit into the bracket-shaped socket 
formed by the distal ends of the tibia and fibula.
When viewed from above, the articular surface of the 
talus is much wider anteriorly than it is posteriorly. As a 
result, the bone fits tighter into its socket when the foot is 
dorsiflexed and the wider surface of the talus moves into 
the ankle joint than when the foot is plantarflexed and the 
narrower part of the talus is in the joint. The joint is there­
fore most stable when the foot is dorsiflexed.
The articular cavity is enclosed by a synovial membrane, 
which attaches around the margins of the articular sur­
faces, and by a fibrous membrane, which covers the syno­
vial membrane and is also attached to the adjacent bones.
surface of the head of metatarsal I also articulates with 
two sesamoid bones.
The sides of the bases of metatarsals II to V also articu­
late with each other. The lateral side of the base of meta­
tarsal V has a prominent tuberosity, which projects 
posteriorly and is the attachment site for the tendon of the 
fibularis brevis muscle.
Phalanges
The phalanges are the bones of the toes (Fig. 6.100). Each 
toe has three phalanges (proximal, middle, and distal), 
In the clinic
Talar beak
Occasionally there is a superior projection of the distal 
aspect of the talus, which is beak-shaped (Fig. 6.101). It is 
often associated with the presence of a bony or fibrous 
joint between the talus and calcaneus.
Fig. 6.101  Radiograph of ankle showing talar beak. 
Talar 
beak

=== PAGE 651 ===
Lower Limb
634
In the clinic
Fracture of the talus
The talus is an unusual bone because it ossifies from a 
single primary ossification center, which initially appears in 
the neck. The posterior aspect of the talus appears to ossify 
last, normally after puberty. In up to 50% of people there is 
a small accessory ossicle (the os trigonum) posterior to the 
lateral tubercle of the posterior process. Articular cartilage 
covers approximately 60% of the talar surface and there are 
no direct tendon or muscle attachments to the bone.
One of the problems with fractures of the talus is that the 
blood supply to the bone is vulnerable to damage. The main 
blood supply to the bone enters the talus through the tarsal 
sinus from a branch of the posterior tibial artery. This vessel 
supplies most of the neck and the body of the talus. 
Branches of the dorsalis pedis artery enter the superior 
aspect of the talar neck and supply the dorsal portion of the 
head and neck, and branches from the fibular artery supply 
a small portion of the lateral talus.
Fractures of the neck of the talus often interrupt the 
blood supply to the talus, so making the body and posterior 
aspect of the talus susceptible to osteonecrosis, which may 
in turn lead to premature osteoarthritis and require extensive 
surgery.
Fig. 6.102  Ankle joint. A. Anterior view with right foot plantarflexed. B. Schematic of joint, posterior view. C. Superior view of the talus to 
show the shape of the articular surface. 
A
B
C
Interosseous
ligament
Tibia
Medial
malleolus
Lateral
malleolus
Lateral malleolus
Talus
Fibula
Fibula
Tibia
Articular surface of talus
Articular surface
narrow posteriorly
Posterior
Medial malleolus
Anterior
Articular surface wide anteriorly

=== PAGE 652 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
635
The ankle joint is stabilized by medial (deltoid) and 
lateral ligaments.
Medial ligament (deltoid ligament)
The medial (deltoid) ligament is large, strong (Fig. 6.103), 
and triangular in shape. Its apex is attached above to the 
medial malleolus and its broad base is attached below to a 
line that extends from the tuberosity of the navicular bone 
in front to the medial tubercle of the talus behind.
The medial ligament is subdivided into four parts based 
on the inferior points of attachment:
■	 The part that attaches in front to the tuberosity of the 
navicular and the associated margin of the plantar 
calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament), which 
connects the navicular bone to the sustentaculum tali 
of the calcaneus bone behind, is the tibionavicular 
part of the medial ligament.
■	 The tibiocalcaneal part, which is more central, 
attaches to the sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus 
bone.
■	 The posterior tibiotalar part attaches to the medial 
side and medial tubercle of the talus.
■	 The fourth part (the anterior tibiotalar part) is deep 
to the tibionavicular and tibiocalcaneal parts of the 
medial ligament and attaches to the medial surface of 
the talus.
Lateral ligament
The lateral ligament of the ankle is composed of three 
separate ligaments, the anterior talofibular ligament, the 
posterior talofibular ligament, and the calcaneofibular liga­
ment (Fig. 6.104):
■	 The anterior talofibular ligament is a short liga­
ment, and attaches the anterior margin of the lateral 
malleolus to the adjacent region of the talus.
■	 The posterior talofibular ligament runs horizontally 
backward and medially from the malleolar fossa on the 
medial side of the lateral malleolus to the posterior 
process of the talus.
■	 The calcaneofibular ligament is attached above to 
the malleolar fossa on the posteromedial side of the 
lateral malleolus and passes posteroinferiorly to attach 
below to a tubercle on the lateral surface of the 
calcaneus.
Fig. 6.103  Medial ligament of the ankle joint, right foot. 
Medial
tubercle
of talus
Sustentaculum tali
of calcaneus bone
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
Tuberosity of
navicular bone
Posterior
tibiotalar part
Tibiocalcaneal part
Tibionavicular part
Anterior tibiotalar part
Medial ligament of the ankle joint
Fig. 6.104  Lateral ligament of the ankle joint. A. Lateral view, right 
foot. B. Posterior view, right foot. 
Malleolar fossa
Anterior talofibular ligament
Calcaneofibular ligament
Posterior
talofibular
ligament
Posterior
talofibular ligament
Posterior
process of talus
Malleolar fossa
Fibula
Tibia
Talus
A
B

=== PAGE 653 ===
Lower Limb
636
Intertarsal joints
The numerous synovial joints between the individual 
tarsal bones mainly invert, evert, supinate, and pronate 
the foot:
■	 Inversion and eversion is turning the whole sole of the 
foot inward and outward, respectively.
■	 Pronation is rotating the front of the foot laterally rela­
tive to the back of the foot, and supination is the reverse 
movement.
Pronation and supination allow the foot to maintain 
normal contact with the ground when in different stances 
or when standing on irregular surfaces.
The major joints at which movements occur include the 
subtalar, talocalcaneonavicular, and calcaneocuboid joints 
(Fig. 6.105). The talocalcaneonavicular and calcaneocu­
boid joints together form what is often referred to as the 
transverse tarsal joint.
Intertarsal joints between the cuneiforms and between 
the cuneiforms and the navicular allow only limited 
movement.
The joint between the cuboid and navicular is normally 
fibrous.
Fig. 6.105  Intertarsal joints, right foot. 
Navicular
Calcaneo-
cuboid joint
Talocalcaneo-
navicular joint
Transverse tarsal
joint
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
Subtalar joint
Talus
Calcaneus
Cuboid
Fibrous cubonavicular joint

=== PAGE 654 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
637
Fig. 6.106  Interosseous talocalcaneal ligament. Lateral view, right 
foot. 
Subtalar joint
Talus
Interosseous
talocalcaneal ligament
Calcaneus
In the clinic
Ankle fractures
An appreciation of ankle anatomy is essential to understand 
the wide variety of fractures that may occur at and around 
the ankle joint.
The ankle joint and related structures can be regarded as 
a fibro-osseous ring oriented in the coronal plane.
■	 The upper part of the ring is formed by the joint between 
the distal ends of the fibula and tibia and by the ankle 
joint itself.
■	 The sides of the ring are formed by the ligaments that 
connect the medial malleolus and lateral malleolus to the 
adjacent tarsal bones.
■	 The bottom of the ring is not part of the ankle joint, but 
consists of the subtalar joint and the associated 
ligaments.
Visualizing the ankle joint and surrounding structures as a 
fibro-osseous ring allows the physician to predict the type of 
damage likely to result from a particular type of injury. For 
example, an inversion injury may fracture the medial 
malleolus and tear ligaments anchoring the lateral malleolus 
to the tarsal bones.
The ring may be disrupted not only by damage to the 
bones (which produces fractures), but also by damage to the 
ligaments. Unlike bone fractures, damage to ligaments is 
unlikely to be appreciated on plain radiographs. When a 
fracture is noted on a plain radiograph, the physician must 
always be aware that there may also be appreciable 
ligamentous disruption.
Ottawa Ankle Rules
The Ottawa ankle rules were developed to assist clinicians in 
deciding whether patients with acute ankle injuries require 
investigation with radiographs in order to avoid unnecessary 
studies. Named after the hospital where they were 
developed, the rules are highly sensitive and have reduced 
the utilization of unwarranted ankle radiographs since their 
implementation.
An ankle x-ray series is required if there is ankle pain and 
any of the following:
■	 Bone tenderness along the distal 6 cm of the posterior 
tibia or tip of the medial malleolus
■	 Bone tenderness along the distal 6 cm of the posterior 
fibula or tip of the lateral malleolus
■	 Inability to bear weight for four steps both immediately 
after the injury and in the emergency department
A foot x-ray series is required if there is midfoot pain and 
any of the following:
■	 Bone tenderness at the base of the fifth metatarsal 
bone
■	 Bone tenderness at the navicular bone
■	 Inability to bear weight for four steps both 
immediately after the injury and in the emergency 
department
Subtalar joint
The subtalar joint is between:
■	 the large posterior calcaneal facet on the inferior surface 
of the talus, and
■	 the corresponding posterior talar facet on the superior 
surface of the calcaneus.
The articular cavity is enclosed by synovial membrane, 
which is covered by a fibrous membrane.
The subtalar joint allows gliding and rotation, 
which are involved in inversion and eversion of the 
foot. Lateral, medial, posterior, and interosseous 
talocalcaneal ligaments stabilize the joint. The interos­
seous talocalcaneal ligament lies in the tarsal sinus 
(Fig. 6.106).

=== PAGE 655 ===
Lower Limb
638
Talocalcaneonavicular joint
The talocalcaneonavicular joint is a complex joint in 
which the head of the talus articulates with the calcaneus 
and plantar calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament) 
below and the navicular in front (Fig. 6.107A).
The talocalcaneonavicular joint allows gliding and rota­
tion movements, which together with similar movements 
of the subtalar joint are involved with inversion and ever­
sion of the foot. It also participates in pronation and 
supination.
The parts of the talocalcaneonavicular joint between 
the talus and calcaneus are:
■	 the anterior and middle calcaneal facets on the inferior 
surface of the talar head, and
■	 the corresponding anterior and middle talar facets on 
the superior surface and sustentaculum tali, respectively, 
of the calcaneus (Fig. 6.107B).
The part of the joint between the talus and the plantar 
calcaneonavicular ligament (spring ligament) is between 
the ligament and the medial facet on the inferior surface of 
the talar head.
The joint between the navicular and talus is the largest 
part of the talocalcaneonavicular joint and is between the 
ovoid anterior end of the talar head and the corresponding 
concave posterior surface of the navicular.
Ligaments
The capsule of the talocalcaneonavicular joint, which is a 
synovial joint, is reinforced:
■	 posteriorly by the interosseous talocalcaneal ligament,
■	 superiorly by the talonavicular ligament, which 
passes between the neck of the talus and adjacent 
regions of the navicular, and
■	 inferiorly by the plantar calcaneonavicular ligament 
(spring ligament) (Fig. 6.107C,D).
The lateral part of the talocalcaneonavicular joint is 
reinforced by the calcaneonavicular part of the bifurcate 
ligament, which is a Y-shaped ligament superior to the 
joint. The base of the bifurcate ligament is attached to the 
anterior aspect of the superior surface of the calcaneus 
and its arms are attached to:
■	 the dorsomedial surface of the cuboid (calcaneocu­
boid ligament), and
■	 the dorsolateral part of the navicular (calcaneona­
vicular ligament).
The plantar calcaneonavicular ligament (spring 
ligament) is a broad thick ligament that spans the space 
between the sustentaculum tali behind and the navicular 
bone in front (Fig. 6.107B,C). It supports the head of the 

=== PAGE 656 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
639
Fig. 6.107  Talocalcaneonavicular joint. A. Medial view, right foot. B. Superior view, right foot, talus removed. C. Ligaments, medial view, right 
foot. D. Ligaments, lateral view, right foot. 
A
C
D
B
Anterior talar articular surface on calcaneus
Anterior talar articular
surface on calcaneus
Middle talar articular surface
on sustentaculum tali
Middle talar articular
surface on
sustentaculum tali
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
Plantar calcaneo-
navicular ligament
Sustentaculum tali
Navicular
Navicular
Calcaneus
Talonavicular ligament
Talonavicular ligament
Navicular
Cuboid
Bifurcate ligament
Interosseous talocalcaneal ligament

=== PAGE 657 ===
Lower Limb
640
joint, but also assists the long plantar ligament in resisting 
depression of the lateral arch of the foot.
The long plantar ligament is the longest ligament in 
the sole of the foot and lies inferior to the plantar calcaneo­
cuboid ligament (Fig. 6.108B):
■	 Posteriorly, it attaches to the inferior surface of the 
calcaneus between the tuberosity and the calcaneal 
tubercle.
■	 Anteriorly, it attaches to a broad ridge and a tubercle on 
the inferior surface of the cuboid bone behind the groove 
for the fibularis longus tendon.
More superficial fibers of the long plantar ligament 
extend to the bases of the metatarsal bones.
The long plantar ligament supports the calcaneocuboid 
joint and is the strongest ligament, resisting depression of 
the lateral arch of the foot.
Tarsometatarsal joints
The tarsometatarsal joints between the metatarsal 
bones and adjacent tarsal bones are plane joints and allow 
limited sliding movements (Fig. 6.109).
talus, takes part in the talocalcaneonavicular joint, and 
resists depression of the medial arch of the foot.
Calcaneocuboid joint
The calcaneocuboid joint is a synovial joint between:
■	 the facet on the anterior surface of the calcaneus, and
■	 the corresponding facet on the posterior surface of the 
cuboid.
The calcaneocuboid joint allows sliding and rotating 
movements involved with inversion and eversion of the 
foot, and also contributes to pronation and supination of 
the forefoot on the hindfoot.
Ligaments
The calcaneocuboid joint is reinforced by the bifurcate 
ligament (see above) and by the long plantar ligament 
and the plantar calcaneocuboid ligament (short plantar 
ligament).
The plantar calcaneocuboid ligament (short plantar 
ligament) is short, wide, and very strong, and connects 
the calcaneal tubercle to the inferior surface of the cuboid 
(Fig. 6.108A). It not only supports the calcaneocuboid 
Fig. 6.108  Plantar ligaments, right foot. A. Plantar calcaneocuboid 
ligament (short plantar ligament). B. Long plantar ligament. 
Fibularis longus tendon
Calcaneocuboid joint
A
B
Calcaneal tubercle
Plantar calcaneocuboid
ligament (short plantar ligament)
Long plantar
ligament
Plantar calcaneo-
navicular ligament
Fig. 6.109  Tarsometatarsal, metatarsophalangeal, and 
interphalangeal joints, and the deep transverse metatarsal 
ligaments, right foot. 
Interphalangeal
joint
Collateral
ligaments
Deep transverse
metatarsal ligament
Plantar
ligaments
Tarsometatarsal
joints
Collateral ligaments
Metatarso-
phalangeal
joints
Interphalangeal joints

=== PAGE 658 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
641
The range of movement of the tarsometatarsal joint 
between the metatarsal of the great toe and the medial 
cuneiform is greater than that of the other tarsometatarsal 
joints and allows flexion, extension, and rotation. The 
tarsometatarsal joints, with the transverse tarsal joint, 
take part in pronation and supination of the foot.
Metatarsophalangeal joints
The metatarsophalangeal joints are ellipsoid synovial 
joints between the sphere-shaped heads of the metatarsals 
and the corresponding bases of the proximal phalanges of 
the digits.
The metatarsophalangeal joints allow extension and 
flexion, and limited abduction, adduction, rotation, and 
circumduction.
The joint capsules are reinforced by medial and lateral 
collateral ligaments, and by plantar ligaments, which 
have grooves on their plantar surfaces for the long tendons 
of the digits (Fig. 6.109).
Deep transverse metatarsal ligaments
Four deep transverse metatarsal ligaments link the 
heads of the metatarsals together and enable the metatar­
sals to act as a single unified structure (Fig. 6.109). The 
ligaments blend with the plantar ligaments of the adjacent 
metatarsophalangeal joints.
The metatarsal of the great toe is oriented in the same 
plane as the metatarsals of the other toes and is linked to 
the metatarsal of the second toe by a deep transverse 
metatarsal ligament. In addition, the joint between the 
metatarsal of the great toe and medial cuneiform has a 
limited range of motion. The great toe therefore has a very 
restricted independent function—unlike the thumb in the 
hand, where the metacarpal is oriented 90° to the meta­
carpals of the fingers, there is no deep transverse metacar­
pal ligament between the metacarpals of the thumb and 
index finger, and the joint between the metacarpal and 
carpal bone allows a wide range of motion.
In the clinic
Bunions
A bunion occurs on the medial aspect of the first 
metatarsophalangeal joint. This is an extremely important 
area of the foot because it is crossed by tendons and 
ligaments, which transmit and distribute the body’s weight 
during movement. It is postulated that abnormal stresses in 
this region of the joint may produce the bunion deformity.
Clinically, a bunion is a significant protuberance of bone 
that may include soft tissue around the medial aspect of the 
first metatarsophalangeal joint. As it progresses, the toe 
appears to move toward the smaller toes, producing 
crowding of the digits.
This deformity tends to occur among people who wear 
high-heeled or pointed shoes, but osteoporosis and a 
hereditary predisposition are also risk factors.
Typically the patient’s symptoms are pain, swelling, and 
inflammation. The bunion tends to enlarge and may cause 
problems in obtaining appropriate footwear.
Initial treatment is by adding padding to shoes, changing 
the type of footwear used, and taking anti-inflammatory 
drugs. Some patients may need surgery to correct the 
deformity and realign the toe.

=== PAGE 659 ===
Lower Limb
642
Interphalangeal joints
The interphalangeal joints are hinge joints that allow 
mainly flexion and extension. They are reinforced by medial 
and lateral collateral ligaments and by plantar liga­
ments (Fig. 6.109).
Tarsal tunnel, retinacula, and arrangement of 
major structures at the ankle
The tarsal tunnel is formed on the posteromedial side of 
the ankle by:
■	 a depression formed by the medial malleolus of the tibia, 
the medial and posterior surfaces of the talus, the medial 
surface of the calcaneus, and the inferior surface of the 
sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus; and
■	 an overlying flexor retinaculum (Fig. 6.110).
Flexor retinaculum
The flexor retinaculum is a strap-like layer of connective 
tissue that spans the bony depression formed by the medial 
malleolus, the medial and posterior surfaces of the talus, 
the medial surface of the calcaneus, and the inferior 
surface of the sustentaculum tali (Fig. 6.110). It attaches 
above to the medial malleolus and below and behind to the 
inferomedial margin of the calcaneus.
The retinaculum is continuous above with the deep 
fascia of the leg and below with the deep fascia (plantar 
aponeurosis) of the foot.
Septa from the flexor retinaculum convert grooves on 
the bones into tubular connective tissue channels for the 
tendons of the flexor muscles as they pass into the sole of 
the foot from the posterior compartment of the leg (Fig. 
6.110). Free movement of the tendons in the channels 
is facilitated by synovial sheaths, which surround the 
tendons.
Two compartments on the posterior surface of the 
medial malleolus are for the tendons of the tibialis posterior 
and flexor digitorum longus muscles. The tendon of the 
tibialis posterior is medial to the tendon of the flexor digi­
torum longus.
Immediately lateral to the tendons of the tibialis poste­
rior and flexor digitorum longus, the posterior tibial artery 
with its associated veins and the tibial nerve pass through 
the tarsal tunnel into the sole of the foot. The pulse of the 
posterior tibial artery can be felt through the flexor reti­
naculum midway between the medial malleolus and the 
calcaneus.
Lateral to the tibial nerve is the compartment on the 
posterior surface of the talus and the undersurface of the 
sustentaculum tali for the tendon of the flexor hallucis 
longus muscle.
Fig. 6.110  Tarsal tunnel and flexor retinaculum. Posteromedial 
view, right foot. A. Bones. B. Tarsal tunnel and flexor retinaculum. 
A
B
Tibia
Talus
Calcaneus
Flexor retinaculum
Tarsal
tunnel
Tendon of flexor
digitorum longus
Tendon of
tibialis posterior
Pulse of post-tibial artery
midway between heel
and medial malleolus
Tendon of
flexor
hallucis
longus
Tibial nerve
Posterior
tibial artery
Tibialis posterior
Flexor digitorum
longus
Tibial artery
Tibial vein
Tibial nerve
Flexor hallucis
longus

=== PAGE 660 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
643
The tendons of the extensor digitorum longus and fibu­
laris tertius pass through a compartment on the lateral 
side of the proximal foot. Medial to these tendons, the 
dorsalis pedis artery (terminal branch of the anterior tibial 
artery), the tendon of the extensor hallucis longus muscle, 
and finally the tendon of the tibialis anterior muscle pass 
under the extensor retinacula.
Fibular retinacula
Fibular (peroneal) retinacula bind the tendons of the fibu­
laris longus and fibularis brevis muscles to the lateral side 
of the foot (Fig. 6.112):
■	 A superior fibular retinaculum extends between the 
lateral malleolus and the calcaneus.
■	 An inferior fibular retinaculum attaches to the 
lateral surface of the calcaneus around the fibular 
trochlea and blends above with the fibers of the inferior 
extensor retinaculum.
At the fibular trochlea, a septum separates the compart­
ment for the tendon of the fibularis brevis muscle above 
from that for the fibularis longus below.
Extensor retinacula
Two extensor retinacula strap the tendons of the extensor 
muscles to the ankle region and prevent tendon bowing 
during extension of the foot and toes (Fig. 6.111):
■	 A superior extensor retinaculum is a thickening of 
deep fascia in the distal leg just superior to the ankle 
joint and attached to the anterior borders of the fibula 
and tibia.
■	 An inferior retinaculum is Y-shaped, attached by its 
base to the lateral side of the upper surface of the cal­
caneus, and crosses medially over the foot to attach by 
one of its arms to the medial malleolus, whereas the 
other arm wraps medially around the foot and attaches 
to the medial side of the plantar aponeurosis.
Fig. 6.111  Extensor retinacula, right foot. 
Anterior tibial artery
Tendon of extensor
hallucis longus
Tendon of
tibialis anterior
Dorsalis
pedis artery
First dorsal
interosseous
muscle
Inferior extensor
retinaculum
Superior extensor
retinaculum
Extensor
digitorum longus
Fibularis tertius
Fig. 6.112  Fibular retinacula. Lateral view, right foot. 
Tendons of fibularis longus and
brevis muscles
Superior fibular retinaculum
Inferior fibular retinaculum
(at fibular trochlea on calcaneus)

=== PAGE 661 ===
Lower Limb
644
Arches of the foot
The bones of the foot do not lie in a horizontal plane. 
Instead, they form longitudinal and transverse arches rela­
tive to the ground (Fig. 6.113), which absorb and distribute 
downward forces from the body during standing and 
moving on different surfaces.
Longitudinal arch
The longitudinal arch of the foot is formed between the 
posterior end of the calcaneus and the heads of the meta­
tarsals (Fig. 6.113A). It is highest on the medial side, where 
it forms the medial part of the longitudinal arch, and 
lowest on the lateral side, where it forms the lateral part.
Transverse arch
The transverse arch of the foot is highest in a coronal plane 
that cuts through the head of the talus and disappears 
near the heads of the metatarsals, where these bones are 
held together by the deep transverse metatarsal ligaments 
(Fig. 6.113B).
Ligament and muscle support
Ligaments and muscles support the arches of the foot 
(Fig. 6.114):
■	 Ligaments that support the arches include the plantar 
calcaneonavicular (spring ligament), plantar calcaneo­
cuboid (short plantar ligament), and long plantar liga­
ments, and the plantar aponeurosis.
Fig. 6.113  Arches of the foot. A. Longitudinal arches, right foot. 
B. Transverse arch, left foot. 
Medial longitudinal arch
Lateral longitudinal arch
Transverse arch
A
B
Fig. 6.114  Support for arches of the foot. A. Ligaments. Medial view, right foot. B. Cross section through the foot to show tendons of muscles 
supporting the arches, left foot. 
Short plantar ligament
Long plantar ligament
Plantar aponeurosis
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
A
B
Tibialis anterior and
posterior tendons
Fibularis longus
tendon

=== PAGE 662 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
645
Fig. 6.115  Plantar aponeurosis, right foot. 
Superficial transverse
metatarsal ligaments
Medial process of
calcaneal tuberosity
Plantar aponeurosis
Anterior arm of inferior
extensor retinaculum
Fig. 6.116  Fibrous digital sheaths, right foot. 
Fibularis
longus
Flexor hallucis longus
Flexor digitorum longus
Tibialis posterior
Tibialis anterior
Flexor digitorum
brevis tendon
Flexor digitorum
longus tendon
Flexor hallucis
longus tendon
Fibrous digital
sheaths
Synovial sheath
■	 Muscles that provide dynamic support for the arches 
during walking include the tibialis anterior and poste­
rior and the fibularis longus.
Plantar aponeurosis
The plantar aponeurosis is a thickening of deep fascia in 
the sole of the foot (Fig. 6.115). It is firmly anchored to the 
medial process of the calcaneal tuberosity and extends 
forward as a thick band of longitudinally arranged connec­
tive tissue fibers. The fibers diverge as they pass anteriorly 
and form digital bands, which enter the toes and connect 
with bones, ligaments, and dermis of the skin.
Distal to the metatarsophalangeal joints, the digital 
bands of the plantar aponeurosis are interconnected by 
transverse fibers, which form superficial transverse meta­
tarsal ligaments.
The plantar aponeurosis supports the longitudinal arch 
of the foot and protects deeper structures in the sole.
Fibrous sheaths of toes
The tendons of the flexor digitorum longus, flexor digito­
rum brevis, and flexor hallucis longus muscles enter fibrous 
digital sheaths or tunnels on the plantar aspect of the 
digits (Fig. 6.116). These fibrous sheaths begin anterior 
to the metatarsophalangeal joints and extend to the 
distal phalanges. They are formed by fibrous arches and 
cruciate (cross-shaped) ligaments attached posteriorly to 
the margins of the phalanges and to the plantar ligaments 
associated with the metatarsophalangeal and interphalan­
geal joints.
These fibrous tunnels hold the tendons to the bony 
plane and prevent tendon bowing when the toes are flexed. 

=== PAGE 663 ===
Lower Limb
646
metatarsophalangeal joints and flexion of the interphalan­
geal joints when the heel is elevated off the ground and the 
toes grip the ground during walking.
Intrinsic muscles
Intrinsic muscles of the foot originate and insert in the foot:
■	 the extensor digitorum brevis and extensor hallucis 
brevis on the dorsal aspect of the foot;
■	 all other intrinsic muscles—the dorsal and plantar 
interossei, flexor digiti minimi brevis, flexor hallucis 
brevis, flexor digitorum brevis, quadratus plantae (flexor 
accessorius), abductor digiti minimi, abductor hallucis, 
and lumbricals—are on the plantar side of the foot in 
the sole where they are organized into four layers.
Intrinsic muscles mainly modify the actions of the long 
tendons and generate fine movements of the toes.
All intrinsic muscles of the foot are innervated by the 
medial and lateral plantar branches of the tibial nerve 
except for the extensor digitorum brevis, which is inner­
vated by the deep fibular nerve. The first two dorsal interos­
sei also may receive part of their innervation from the deep 
fibular nerve.
Within each tunnel, the tendons are surrounded by a 
synovial sheath.
Extensor hoods
The tendons of the extensor digitorum longus, extensor 
digitorum brevis, and extensor hallucis longus pass into 
the dorsal aspect of the digits and expand over the proximal 
phalanges to form complex dorsal digital expansions 
(“extensor hoods”) (Fig. 6.117).
Each extensor hood is triangular in shape with the 
apex attached to the distal phalanx, the central region 
attached to the middle (toes II to V) or proximal (toe I) 
phalanx, and each corner of the base wrapped around the 
sides of the metatarsophalangeal joint. The corners of the 
hoods attach mainly to the deep transverse metatarsal 
ligaments.
Many of the intrinsic muscles of the foot insert into the 
free margin of the hood on each side. The attachment of 
these muscles into the extensor hoods allows the forces 
from these muscles to be distributed over the toes to 
cause flexion of the metatarsophalangeal joints while at 
the same time extending the interphalangeal joints (Fig. 
6.117). The function of these movements in the foot is 
uncertain, but they may prevent overextension of the 
Fig. 6.117  Extensor hoods. 
1st dorsal interosseous muscle
Extensor tendons
Extensor hood
Deep transverse metatarsal ligament
Lumbrical
Flexor digitorum longus
Extension of PIP joints prevents overflexion
Flexion of MTP joint
prevents overextension

=== PAGE 664 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
647
On the dorsal aspect
Extensor digitorum brevis and extensor 
hallucis brevis
The extensor digitorum brevis is attached to a rough­
ened area on the superolateral surface of the calcaneus 
lateral to the tarsal sinus (Fig. 6.118 and Table 6.10).
The flat muscle belly passes anteromedially over the 
foot, deep to the tendons of the extensor digitorum longus, 
and forms three tendons, which enter digits II, III, and IV. 
The tendons join the lateral sides of the tendons of the 
extensor digitorum longus. The extensor digitorum brevis 
extends the middle three toes through attachments to the 
long extensor tendons and extensor hoods. It is innervated 
by the deep fibular nerve.
The extensor hallucis brevis originates in conjunc­
tion with the extensor digitorum brevis. Its tendon attaches 
to the base of the proximal phalanx of the great toes. The 
muscle extends the metatarsophalangeal joint of the great 
toe and is innervated by the deep fibular nerve.
In the sole
The muscles in the sole of the foot are organized into four 
layers. From superficial to deep, or plantar to dorsal, these 
layers are the first, second, third, and fourth layers.
Fig. 6.118  Extensor digitorum brevis muscle, right foot. 
Synovial
sheaths
Extensor
hallucis longus
Extensor
hallucis brevis
Extensor
hood
Extensor
digitorum
brevis
Extensor
digitorum
longus
Table 6.10  Muscles of the dorsal aspect of the foot (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Extensor digitorum 
brevis
Superolateral surface of 
the calcaneus
Lateral sides of the tendons 
of extensor digitorum longus 
of toes II to IV
Deep fibular nerve 
(S1, S2)
Extension of toes II to IV
Extensor hallucis brevis
Superolateral surface of 
calcaneus
Base of proximal phalanx of 
great toe
Deep fibular nerve 
(S1, S2)
Extension of metatarsophalangeal 
joint of great toe

=== PAGE 665 ===
Lower Limb
648
Fig. 6.119  First layer of muscles in the sole of the right foot. 
Flexor digitorum
longus tendon
Fibrous
digital
sheath
Synovial sheath
Abductor
digiti minimi
Ligamentous
attachment
between
calcaneus and
metatarsal V
Flexor digitorum
brevis
Calcaneal tuberosity
Cut plantar aponeurosis
Abductor
hallucis
Sesamoid
bone
Flexor digitorum
brevis tendon
Table 6.11  First layer of muscles in the sole of the foot (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Abductor hallucis
Medial process of calcaneal 
tuberosity
Medial side of base of 
proximal phalanx of great toe
Medial plantar nerve 
from the tibial nerve 
(S1, S2, S3)
Abducts and flexes great 
toe at metatarsophalangeal 
joint
Flexor digitorum 
brevis
Medial process of calcaneal 
tuberosity and plantar 
aponeurosis
Sides of plantar surface of 
middle phalanges of lateral 
four toes
Medial plantar nerve 
from the tibial nerve 
(S1, S2, S3)
Flexes lateral four toes at 
proximal interphalangeal 
joint
Abductor digiti 
minimi
Lateral and medial processes of 
calcaneal tuberosity, and band of 
connective tissue connecting 
calcaneus with base of 
metatarsal V
Lateral side of base of 
proximal phalanx of little toe
Lateral plantar nerve 
from the tibial nerve 
(S1, S2, S3)
Abducts little toe at the 
metatarsophalangeal joint
First layer
There are three components in the first layer of muscles, 
which is the most superficial of the four layers and is 
immediately deep to the plantar aponeurosis (Fig. 6.119 
and Table 6.11). From medial to lateral, these muscles are 
the abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, and abduc­
tor digiti minimi.
Abductor hallucis
The abductor hallucis muscle forms the medial margin 
of the foot and contributes to a soft tissue bulge on the 
medial side of the sole (Fig. 6.119). It originates from the 
medial process of the calcaneal tuberosity and adjacent 
margins of the flexor retinaculum and plantar aponeuro­
sis. It forms a tendon that inserts on the medial side of the 
base of the proximal phalanx of the great toe and on 
the medial sesamoid bone associated with the tendon of 
the flexor hallucis brevis muscle.
The abductor hallucis abducts and flexes the great toe 
at the metatarsophalangeal joint and is innervated by the 
medial plantar branch of the tibial nerve.
Flexor digitorum brevis
The flexor digitorum brevis muscle lies immediately 
superior to the plantar aponeurosis and inferior to the 
tendons of the flexor digitorum longus in the sole of the 
foot (Fig. 6.119). The flat spindle-shaped muscle belly origi­
nates as a tendon from the medial process of the calcaneal 
tuberosity and from the adjacent plantar aponeurosis.
The muscle fibers of the flexor digitorum brevis converge 
anteriorly to form four tendons, which each enter one of 
the lateral four toes. Near the base of the proximal phalanx 
of the toe, each tendon splits to pass dorsally around each 
side of the tendon of the flexor digitorum longus and 
attach to the margins of the middle phalanx.

=== PAGE 666 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
649
The flexor digitorum brevis flexes the lateral four toes at 
the proximal interphalangeal joints and is innervated by 
the medial plantar branch of the tibial nerve.
Abductor digiti minimi
The abductor digiti minimi muscle is on the lateral side 
of the foot and contributes to the large lateral plantar 
eminence on the sole (Fig. 6.119). It has a broad base of 
origin, mainly from the lateral and medial processes of the 
calcaneal tuberosity and from a fibrous band of connective 
tissue, which connects the calcaneus with the base of 
metatarsal V.
The abductor digiti minimi forms a tendon, which 
travels in a shallow groove on the plantar surface of the 
base of metatarsal V and continues forward to attach to 
the lateral side of the base of the proximal phalanx of the 
little toe.
The abductor digiti minimi abducts the little toe at the 
metatarsophalangeal joint and is innervated by the lateral 
plantar branch of the tibial nerve.
Second layer
The second muscle layer in the sole of the foot is associated 
with the tendons of the flexor digitorum longus muscle, 
which pass through this layer, and consists of the quadra­
tus plantae and four lumbrical muscles (Fig. 6.120 and 
Table 6.12).
Quadratus plantae
The quadratus plantae muscle is a flat quadrangular 
muscle with two heads of origin (Fig. 6.120):
■	 One of the heads originates from the medial surface of 
the calcaneus inferior to the sustentaculum tali.
■	 The other head originates from the inferior surface 
of the calcaneus anterior to the lateral process of the 
calcaneal tuberosity and the attachment of the long 
plantar ligament.
Fig. 6.120  Second layer of muscles in the sole of the right foot. 
Cut flexor digitorum
brevis tendon
Extensor hood
Quadratus
plantae
Flexor digitorum
longus
Flexor hallucis
longus
Lumbrical
muscles
Table 6.12  Second layer of muscles in the sole of the foot (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Quadratus 
plantae
Medial surface of calcaneus and lateral 
process of calcaneal tuberosity
Lateral side of tendon of 
flexor digitorum longus in 
proximal sole of the foot
Lateral plantar nerve from 
tibial nerve (S1, S2, S3)
Assists flexor digitorum 
longus tendon in flexing 
toes II to V
Lumbricals
First lumbrical—medial side of tendon 
of flexor digitorum longus associated 
with toe II; second, third, and fourth 
lumbricals—adjacent surfaces of 
adjacent tendons of flexor digitorum 
longus
Medial free margins of 
extensor hoods of toes
II to V
First lumbrical—medial plantar 
nerve from the tibial nerve; 
second, third, and fourth 
lumbricals—lateral plantar 
nerve from the tibial nerve 
(S2, S3)
Flexion of 
metatarsophalangeal joint 
and extension of 
interphalangeal joints

=== PAGE 667 ===
Lower Limb
650
In the clinic
Plantar fasciitis
The plantar aponeurosis is a flat band of connective tissue 
that supports the arch of the sole of the foot. It runs from 
the calcaneal tuberosity to the base of the toes. Overuse 
and increased strain on the plantar aponeurosis, such as 
excessive running and standing, and increased body 
weight, can lead to micro-tears and degeneration within 
the aponeurosis at the heel with disorganization of the 
collagen fibers. Patients typically present with mild to 
severe heel pain, which appears thickened on imaging 
(Fig. 6.121). It is usually successfully treated with intense 
physiotherapy, but may require image-guided injection 
therapies. In severe cases, the diseased section of the 
fascia needs to be surgically removed.
Fig. 6.121  MRI of posterior foot in a patient with plantar 
fasciitis shows thickening of the plantar aponeurosis at the 
calcaneal insertion and a calcaneal spur. 
Plantar fasciitis
Lumbricals
The lumbrical muscles are four worm-like muscles that 
originate from the tendons of the flexor digitorum longus 
and pass dorsally to insert into the free medial margins of 
the extensor hoods of the four lateral toes (Fig. 6.120).
The first lumbrical originates from the medial side of the 
tendon of the flexor digitorum longus that is associated 
with the second toe. The remaining three muscles are 
bipennate and originate from the sides of adjacent tendons.
The lumbrical muscles act through the extensor hoods 
to resist excessive extension of the metatarsophalangeal 
joints and flexion of the interphalangeal joints when the 
heel leaves the ground during walking.
The first lumbrical is innervated by the medial plantar 
nerve, while the other three are innervated by the lateral 
plantar nerve.
Third layer
There are three muscles in the third layer in the sole of the 
foot (Fig. 6.122 and Table 6.13):
■	 Two (the flexor hallucis brevis and adductor hallucis) 
are associated with the great toe.
■	 The third (the flexor digiti minimi brevis) is associated 
with the little toe.
Flexor hallucis brevis
The flexor hallucis brevis muscle has two tendinous 
heads of origin (Fig. 6.122):
■	 The lateral head originates from the plantar surfaces 
of the cuboid, behind the groove for the fibularis longus, 
and adjacent surface of the lateral cuneiform.
■	 The medial head originates from the tendon of the 
tibialis posterior muscle as it passes into the sole of 
the foot.
The medial and lateral heads unite and give rise to a 
muscle belly, which itself is separated into medial and 
lateral parts adjacent to the plantar surface of metatarsal 
I. Each part of the muscle gives rise to a tendon that inserts 
on either the lateral or medial side of the base of the proxi­
mal phalanx of the great toe.
A sesamoid bone occurs in each tendon of the flexor 
hallucis brevis as it crosses the plantar surface of the head 
of metatarsal I. The tendon of the flexor hallucis longus 
passes between the sesamoid bones.
The flexor hallucis brevis flexes the metatarsophalan­
geal joint of the great toe and is innervated by the medial 
plantar nerve.
The quadratus plantae muscle inserts into the lateral 
side of the tendon of the flexor digitorum longus in the 
proximal half of the sole of the foot near where the tendon 
divides.
The quadratus plantae assists the flexor digitorum 
longus tendon in flexing the toes and may also adjust the 
“line of pull” of this tendon as it enters the sole of the foot 
from the medial side. The muscle is innervated by the 
lateral plantar nerve.

=== PAGE 668 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
651
Adductor hallucis
The adductor hallucis muscle originates by two muscu­
lar heads, transverse and oblique, which join near their 
ends to insert into the lateral side of the base of the proxi­
mal phalanx of the great toe (Fig. 6.122):
■	 The transverse head originates from the plantar liga­
ments associated with the metatarsophalangeal joints 
of the lateral three toes and from the associated deep 
transverse metatarsal ligaments—the muscle crosses 
the sole of the foot transversely from lateral to medial 
and joins the oblique head near the base of the great toe.
■	 The oblique head is larger than the transverse head 
and originates from the plantar surfaces of the bases of 
metatarsals II to IV and from the sheath covering 
the fibularis longus muscle—this head passes anterolat­
erally through the sole of the foot and joins the trans­
verse head.
The tendon of insertion of the adductor hallucis 
attaches to the lateral sesamoid bone associated with the 
tendon of the flexor hallucis brevis muscle in addition to 
attaching to the proximal phalanx.
The adductor hallucis adducts the great toe at the 
metatarsophalangeal joint and is innervated by the lateral 
plantar nerve.
Flexor digiti minimi brevis
The flexor digiti minimi brevis muscle originates from 
the plantar surface of the base of metatarsal V and adja­
cent sheath of the fibularis longus tendon (Fig. 6.122). It 
inserts on the lateral side of the base of the proximal 
phalanx of the little toe.
The flexor digiti minimi brevis flexes the little toe at the 
metatarsophalangeal joint and is innervated by the lateral 
plantar nerve.
Fig. 6.122  Third layer of muscles in the sole of the right foot. 
Flexor
hallucis
brevis
Transverse head
Oblique head
Adductor hallucis
Flexor digiti
minimi brevis
Tendon of fibularis
longus muscle
Tendon of tibialis
posterior muscle
Tendon of flexor
hallucis longus
Table 6.13  Third layer of muscles in the sole of the foot (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Flexor hallucis 
brevis
Plantar surface of cuboid and lateral 
cuneiform; tendon of tibialis posterior
Lateral and medial sides of 
base of proximal phalanx of 
the great toe
Medial plantar nerve 
from tibial nerve 
(S1, S2)
Flexes metatarsophalangeal 
joint of the great toe
Adductor hallucis
Transverse head—ligaments 
associated with metatarsophalangeal 
joints of lateral three toes; oblique 
head—bases of metatarsals II to IV 
and from sheath covering fibularis 
longus
Lateral side of base of 
proximal phalanx of great toe
Lateral plantar nerve 
from tibial nerve 
(S2, S3)
Adducts great toe at 
metatarsophalangeal joint
Flexor digiti 
minimi brevis
Base of metatarsal V and related 
sheath of fibularis longus tendon
Lateral side of base of 
proximal phalanx of little toe
Lateral plantar nerve 
from tibial nerve 
(S2, S3)
Flexes little toe at 
metatarsophalangeal joint

=== PAGE 669 ===
Lower Limb
652
Table 6.14  Fourth layer of muscles in the sole of the foot (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Dorsal interossei
Sides of adjacent 
metatarsals
Extensor hoods and bases 
of proximal phalanges of 
toes II to IV
Lateral plantar nerve from 
tibial nerve; first and second 
dorsal interossei also 
innervated by deep fibular 
nerve (S2, S3)
Abduction of toes II to IV at 
metatarsophalangeal joints; resist 
extension of metatarsophalangeal 
joints and flexion of interphalangeal 
joints
Plantar interossei
Medial sides of 
metatarsals of toes 
III to V
Extensor hoods and bases 
of proximal phalanges of 
toes III to V
Lateral plantar nerve from 
tibial nerve (S2, S3)
Adduction of toes III to V at 
metatarsophalangeal joints; resist 
extension of the metatarsophalangeal 
joints and flexion of the interphalangeal 
joints
Fig. 6.123  Fourth layer of muscles in the sole of the right foot. 
Abduct (dorsal interossei)
Adduct (plantar interossei)
Plantar ligaments
Deep transverse
metatarsal ligaments
Third plantar
interosseous
First dorsal
interosseous
muscle
Fourth layer
There are two muscle groups in the deepest muscle layer 
in the sole of the foot, the dorsal and plantar interossei 
(Fig. 6.123 and Table 6.14).
Dorsal interossei
The four dorsal interossei are the most superior muscles 
in the sole of the foot and abduct the second to fourth toes 
relative to the long axis through the second toe (Fig. 6.123). 
All four muscles are bipennate and originate from the sides 
of adjacent metatarsals.
The tendons of the dorsal interossei insert into the free 
margin of the extensor hoods and base of the proximal 
phalanges of the toes.
The second toe can be abducted to either side of its long 
axis, so it has two dorsal interossei associated with it, one 
on each side. The third and fourth toes have a dorsal 
interosseous muscle on their lateral sides only. The great 
and little toes have their own abductors (the abductor hal­
lucis and abductor digiti minimi) in the first layer of muscles 
in the sole of the foot.
In addition to abduction, the dorsal interossei act 
through the extensor hoods to resist extension of the 
metatarsophalangeal joints and flexion of the interphalan­
geal joints.
The dorsal interossei are innervated by the lateral 
plantar nerve. The first and second dorsal interossei also 
receive branches on their superior surfaces from the deep 
fibular nerve.
Plantar interossei
The three plantar interossei adduct the third, fourth, 
and little toes toward the long axis through the second toe 
(Fig. 6.123).
Each plantar interosseous muscle originates from the 
medial side of its associated metatarsal and inserts into 

=== PAGE 670 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
653
the medial free margin of the extensor hood and base of 
the proximal phalanx.
The great toe has its own adductor (the adductor hal­
lucis) in the third layer of muscles in the sole of the foot 
and the second toe is adducted back to its longitudinal axis 
by using one of its dorsal interossei.
In addition to adduction, the plantar interossei act 
through the extensor hoods to resist extension of the 
metatarsophalangeal joints and flexion of the interphalan­
geal joints. All are innervated by the lateral plantar nerve.
Arteries
Blood supply to the foot is by branches of the posterior 
tibial and dorsalis pedis (dorsal artery of the foot) 
arteries.
The posterior tibial artery enters the sole and bifurcates 
into lateral and medial plantar arteries. The lateral plantar 
artery joins with the terminal end of the dorsalis pedis 
artery (the deep plantar artery) to form the deep plantar 
arch. Branches from this arch supply the toes.
The dorsalis pedis artery is the continuation of the 
anterior tibial artery, passes onto the dorsal aspect of the 
foot and then inferiorly, as the deep plantar artery, between 
metatarsals I and II to enter the sole of the foot.
Posterior tibial artery and plantar arch
The posterior tibial artery enters the foot through the 
tarsal tunnel on the medial side of the ankle and posterior 
to the medial malleolus. Midway between the medial mal­
leolus and the heel, the pulse of the posterior tibial artery 
is palpable because here the artery is covered only by a thin 
layer of retinaculum, by superficial connective tissue, and 
by skin. Near this location, the posterior tibial artery bifur­
cates into a small medial plantar artery and a much larger 
lateral plantar artery.
Lateral plantar artery
The lateral plantar artery passes anterolaterally into the 
sole of the foot, first deep to the proximal end of the abduc­
tor hallucis muscle and then between the quadratus 
plantae and flexor digitorum brevis muscles (Fig. 6.124). 
It reaches the base of metatarsal V where it lies in the 
groove between the flexor digitorum brevis and abductor 
digiti minimi muscles. From here, the lateral plantar artery 
curves medially to form the deep plantar arch, which 
crosses the deep plane of the sole on the metatarsal bases 
and the interossei muscles.
Between the bases of metatarsals I and II, the deep 
plantar arch joins with the terminal branch (deep plantar 
artery) of the dorsalis pedis artery, which enters the sole 
from the dorsal side of the foot.
Fig. 6.124  Arteries in the sole of the right foot. 
Digital branches
Deep plantar artery: terminal branch
of dorsalis pedis artery
Plantar metatarsal arteries
Perforating
vessels
Deep
plantar arch
Lateral plantar
artery
Posterior tibial artery
Medial plantar
artery
Major branches of the deep plantar arch include:
■	 a digital branch to the lateral side of the little toe;
■	 four plantar metatarsal arteries, which supply digital 
branches to adjacent sides of toes I to V and the medial 
side of the great toe; and
■	 three perforating arteries, which pass between the bases 
of metatarsals II to V to anastomose with vessels on the 
dorsal aspect of the foot.
Medial plantar artery
The medial plantar artery passes into the sole of the foot 
by passing deep to the proximal end of the abductor 

=== PAGE 671 ===
Lower Limb
654
hallucis muscle (Fig. 6.124). It supplies a deep branch to 
adjacent muscles and then passes forward in the groove 
between the abductor hallucis and the flexor digitorum 
brevis muscles. It ends by joining the digital branch of the 
deep plantar arch, which supplies the medial side of the 
great toe.
Near the base of metatarsal I, the medial plantar artery 
gives rise to a superficial branch, which divides into three 
vessels that pass superficial to the flexor digitorum brevis 
muscle to join the plantar metatarsal arteries from the deep 
plantar arch.
Dorsalis pedis artery
The dorsalis pedis artery is the continuation of the anterior 
tibial artery and begins as the anterior tibial artery crosses 
the ankle joint (Fig. 6.125). It passes anteriorly over the 
dorsal aspect of the talus, navicular, and intermediate 
cuneiform bones, and then passes inferiorly, as the deep 
plantar artery, between the two heads of the first dorsal 
interosseous muscle to join the deep plantar arch in the 
sole of the foot. The pulse of the dorsalis pedis artery on 
the dorsal surface of the foot can be felt by gently palpating 
the vessel against the underlying tarsal bones between the 
tendons of the extensor hallucis longus and the extensor 
digitorum longus to the second toe.
Branches of the dorsalis pedis artery include lateral and 
medial tarsal branches, an arcuate artery, and a first dorsal 
metatarsal artery:
■	 The tarsal arteries pass medially and laterally over the 
tarsal bones, supplying adjacent structures and anasto­
mosing with a network of vessels formed around the 
ankle.
■	 The arcuate artery passes laterally over the dorsal 
aspect of the metatarsals near their bases and gives rise 
to three dorsal metatarsal arteries, which supply 
dorsal digital arteries to adjacent sides of digits II to 
V, and to a dorsal digital artery that supplies the lateral 
side of digit V.
■	 The first dorsal metatarsal artery (the last branch of 
the dorsalis pedis artery before the dorsalis pedis artery 
continues as the deep plantar artery into the sole of the 
Fig. 6.125  Dorsalis pedis artery right foot. 
Extensor
hood
Dorsal
digital
arteries
Anterior tibial artery
Dorsalis pedis
artery
Anterior medial
malleolar artery
Anterior lateral
malleolar artery
Medial and lateral
tarsal branches
Extensor
hallucis
longus
Dorsalis pedis
artery
Deep plantar
artery
First dorsal
metatarsal
artery
First dorsal
interosseous
muscle
Arcuate artery
Tendon of extensor
digitorum longus
to toe II
foot) supplies dorsal digital branches to adjacent sides of 
the great and second toes.
The dorsal metatarsal arteries connect with perforating 
branches from the deep plantar arch and similar branches 
from the plantar metatarsal arteries.

=== PAGE 672 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
655
Fig. 6.126  Superficial veins of the right foot. 
Great
saphenous vein
Medial
malleolus
Dorsal
venous arch
Lateral
malleolus
Small
saphenous vein
Veins
There are interconnected networks of deep and superficial 
veins in the foot. The deep veins follow the arteries. Super­
ficial veins drain into a dorsal venous arch on the dorsal 
surface of the foot over the metatarsals (Fig. 6.126):
■	 The great saphenous vein originates from the medial 
side of the arch and passes anterior to the medial mal­
leolus and onto the medial side of the leg.
■	 The small saphenous vein originates from the lateral 
side of the arch and passes posterior to the lateral mal­
leolus and onto the back of the leg.
Nerves
The foot is supplied by the tibial, deep fibular, superficial 
fibular, sural, and saphenous nerves:
■	 All five nerves contribute to cutaneous or general 
sensory innervation.
■	 The tibial nerve innervates all intrinsic muscles of the 
foot except for the extensor digitorum brevis, which is 
innervated by the deep fibular nerve.
■	 The deep fibular nerve often also contributes to the 
innervation of the first and second dorsal interossei.

=== PAGE 673 ===
Lower Limb
656
Fig. 6.127  Lateral and medial plantar nerves. A. Sole of the right 
foot. B. Cutaneous distribution of right foot. 
Superficial
branch
Deep
branch
Lateral plantar
nerve
A
B
Lateral plantar
nerve
Tibial nerve
Medial plantar
nerve
Medial plantar
nerve
Sural nerve
Tibial nerve
Saphenous nerve
Tibial nerve
The tibial nerve enters the foot through the tarsal tunnel 
posterior to the medial malleolus. In the tunnel, the nerve 
is lateral to the posterior tibial artery, and gives origin to 
medial calcaneal branches, which penetrate the flexor 
retinaculum to supply the heel. Midway between the 
medial malleolus and the heel, the tibial nerve bifurcates 
with the posterior tibial artery into:
■	 a large medial plantar nerve, and
■	 a smaller lateral plantar nerve (Fig. 6.127).
The medial and lateral plantar nerves lie together 
between their corresponding arteries.
Medial plantar nerve
The medial plantar nerve is the major sensory nerve in 
the sole of the foot (Fig. 6.127). It innervates skin on most 
of the anterior two-thirds of the sole and adjacent surfaces 
of the medial three and one-half toes, which includes the 
great toe. In addition to this large area of plantar skin, the 
nerve also innervates four intrinsic muscles—the abductor 
hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, flexor hallucis brevis, and 
first lumbrical.
The medial plantar nerve passes into the sole of the foot 
deep to the abductor hallucis muscle and forward in the 
groove between the abductor hallucis and flexor digitorum 
brevis, supplying branches to both these muscles.
The medial plantar nerve supplies a digital branch 
(proper plantar digital nerve) to the medial side of the 
great toe and then divides into three nerves (common 
plantar digital nerves) on the plantar surface of the 
flexor digitorum brevis, which continue forward to supply 
proper plantar digital branches to adjacent surfaces of toes 
I to IV. The nerve to the first lumbrical originates from the 
first common plantar digital nerve.
Lateral plantar nerve
The lateral plantar nerve is an important motor nerve 
in the foot because it innervates all intrinsic muscles in the 
sole, except for the muscles supplied by the medial plantar 
nerve (the abductor hallucis, flexor digitorum brevis, flexor 
hallucis brevis, and first lumbrical) (Fig. 6.127). It also 
innervates a strip of skin on the lateral side of the anterior 
two-thirds of the sole and the adjacent plantar surfaces of 
the lateral one and one-half digits.
The lateral plantar nerve enters the sole of the foot by 
passing deep to the proximal attachment of the abductor 
hallucis muscle. It continues laterally and anteriorly across 
the sole between the flexor digitorum brevis and quadratus 
plantae muscles, supplying branches to both these muscles, 

=== PAGE 674 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Foot
6
657
and then divides near the head of metatarsal V into deep 
and superficial branches.
The superficial branch of the lateral plantar nerve 
gives rise to a proper plantar digital nerve, which sup­
plies skin on the lateral side of the little toe, and to a 
common plantar digital nerve, which divides to supply 
proper plantar digital nerves to skin on the adjacent sides 
of toes IV and V.
The proper plantar digital nerve to the lateral side of the 
little toe also innervates the flexor digiti minimi brevis and 
the dorsal and plantar interossei muscles between metatar­
sals IV and V.
The deep branch of the lateral plantar nerve is motor 
and accompanies the lateral plantar artery deep to the long 
flexor tendons and the adductor hallucis muscle. It supplies 
branches to the second to fourth lumbrical muscles, the 
adductor hallucis muscle, and all interossei except those 
between metatarsals IV and V, which are innervated by the 
superficial branch.
In the clinic
Morton’s neuroma
A Morton’s neuroma is an enlarged common plantar 
nerve, usually in the third interspace between the third 
and fourth toes. In this region of the foot the lateral 
plantar nerve often unites with the medial plantar nerve. 
As the two nerves join, the resulting nerve is typically 
larger in diameter than those of the other toes. Also, it is 
in a relatively subcutaneous position, just above the fat 
pad of the foot close to the artery and the vein. Above 
the nerve is the deep transverse metatarsal ligament, 
which is a broad strong structure holding the metatarsals 
together. Typically, as the patient enters the “push-off” 
phase of walking the interdigital nerve is sandwiched 
between the ground and the deep transverse metatarsal 
ligament. The forces tend to compress the common 
plantar nerve, which can be irritated, in which case there 
is usually some associated inflammatory change and 
thickening.
Typically, patients experience pain in the third 
interspace, which may be sharp or dull and is usually 
worsened by wearing shoes and walking.
Treatment may include injection of anti-inflammatory 
drugs, or it may be necessary to surgically remove the 
lesion.
Fig. 6.128  A.Terminal branches of superficial and deep fibular 
nerves in the right foot. B. Cutaneous distribution right foot. 
Deep fibular
nerve
A
B
Branches to
first and second
dorsal interossei
Extensor
digitorum
brevis
Branch of deep
fibular to extensor
digitorum brevis
Superficial
fibular nerve
Saphenous nerve
Superficial
fibular nerve
Deep fibular nerve
Sural nerve
Deep fibular nerve
The deep fibular nerve innervates the extensor digitorum 
brevis, contributes to the innervation of the first two dorsal 
interossei muscles, and supplies general sensory branches 
to the skin on the adjacent dorsal sides of the first and 
second toes and to the web space between them (Fig. 6.128).

=== PAGE 675 ===
Lower Limb
658
Sural nerve
The sural nerve is a cutaneous branch of the tibial nerve 
that originates high in the leg. It enters the foot in superfi­
cial fascia posterior to the lateral malleolus close to the 
short saphenous vein. Terminal branches innervate skin 
on the lateral side of the foot and dorsolateral surface of 
the little toe (Fig. 6.128B).
Saphenous nerve
The saphenous nerve is a cutaneous branch of the femoral 
nerve that originates in the thigh. Terminal branches 
enter the foot in superficial fascia on the medial side of the 
ankle and supply skin on the medial side of the proximal 
foot (Fig. 6.128B).
The deep fibular nerve enters the dorsal aspect of 
the foot on the lateral side of the dorsalis pedis artery, 
and is parallel with and lateral to the tendon of the 
extensor hallucis longus muscle. Just distal to the ankle 
joint, the nerve gives origin to a lateral branch, which 
innervates the extensor digitorum brevis from its deep 
surface.
The deep fibular nerve continues forward on the dorsal 
surface of the foot, penetrates deep fascia between meta­
tarsals I and II near the metatarsophalangeal joints, and 
then divides into two dorsal digital nerves, which supply 
skin over adjacent surfaces of toes I and II down to the 
beginning of the nail beds.
Small motor branches, which contribute to the supply 
of the first two dorsal interossei muscles, originate from the 
deep fibular nerve before it penetrates deep fascia.
Superficial fibular nerve
The superficial fibular nerve is sensory to most skin on 
the dorsal aspect of the foot and toes except for skin on 
adjacent sides of toes I and II (which is innervated by 
the deep fibular nerve) and skin on the lateral side of the 
foot and little toe (which is innervated by the sural nerve; 
Fig. 6.128).
The superficial fibular nerve penetrates deep fascia 
on the anterolateral side of the lower leg and enters the 
dorsal aspect of the foot in superficial fascia. It gives rise to 
cutaneous branches and dorsal digital nerves along 
its course.
In the clinic
Clubfoot
Clubfoot is a congenital deformity in which babies are 
born with one or both feet pointing inward and 
downward. It is treated with gentle manipulation of the 
affected foot and with plaster casts to straighten the foot, 
which is usually followed by a minor surgical procedure 
where the calcaneal tendon is cut to release the foot into 
a better position.

=== PAGE 676 ===
6
659
trochanter can be easily felt as a hard bony protuberance 
about one hand’s width inferior to the midpoint of the 
iliac crest. The ischial tuberosity is palpable just above the 
gluteal fold.
The gluteal region can be divided into quadrants by two 
lines positioned using palpable bony landmarks.
■	 One line descends vertically from the highest point of 
the iliac crest.
■	 The other line passes horizontally through the first line 
midway between the highest point of the iliac crest and 
the horizontal plane through the ischial tuberosity.
The sciatic nerve curves through the upper lateral 
corner of the lower medial quadrant and descends along 
the lateral margin of the lower medial quadrant. Injections 
can be carried out in the anterior corner of the upper 
lateral quadrant to avoid injury to the sciatic nerve and 
major vessels in the region (Fig. 6.129B).
Surface anatomy
Lower limb surface anatomy
Tendons, muscles, and bony landmarks in the lower limb 
are used to locate major arteries, veins, and nerves.
Because vessels are large, they can be used as entry 
points to the vascular system. In addition, vessels in the 
lower limb are farthest from the heart and the most inferior 
in the body. Therefore, the nature of peripheral pulses in 
the lower limb can give important information about the 
status of the circulatory system in general.
Sensation and muscle action in the lower limb are tested 
to assess lumbar and sacral regions of the spinal cord.
Avoiding the sciatic nerve
The sciatic nerve innervates muscles in the posterior 
compartment of the thigh, muscles in the leg and foot, 
and an appreciable area of skin. It enters the lower limb 
in the gluteal region (Fig. 6.129) and passes inferiorly 
midway between two major palpable bony landmarks, the 
greater trochanter and the ischial tuberosity. The greater 
Fig. 6.129  Avoiding the sciatic nerve. A. Posterior view of the gluteal region of a man with the position of the sciatic nerve indicated. B. 
Posterolateral view of the left gluteal region with gluteal quadrants and the position of the sciatic nerve indicated. 
A
B
Gluteal fold
Ischial tuberosity
Ischial tuberosity
Greater trochanter
Sciatic nerve
Sciatic nerve
Vertical line
Highest point on iliac crest
Safe injection region
Horizontal line
Upper
lateral
quadrant
Lower
lateral
quadrant
Upper
medial
quadrant
Lower
medial
quadrant
Surface Anatomy  •  Avoiding the Sciatic Nerve

=== PAGE 677 ===
Lower Limb
660
longus muscle, the medial margin of the sartorius muscle, 
and the inguinal ligament.
The tendon of the adductor longus muscle can be pal­
pated as a cord-like structure that attaches to bone imme­
diately inferior to the pubic tubercle.
The sartorius muscle originates from the anterior 
superior iliac spine and crosses anteriorly over the thigh 
to attach to the medial aspect of the tibia below the 
knee joint.
The inguinal ligament attaches to the anterior superior 
iliac spine laterally and the pubic tubercle medially.
The femoral artery descends into the thigh from the 
abdomen by passing under the inguinal ligament and into 
the femoral triangle. In the femoral triangle, its pulse is 
easily felt just inferior to the inguinal ligament midway 
between the pubic symphysis and the anterior superior 
iliac spine. Medial to the artery is the femoral vein and 
medial to the vein is the femoral canal, which contains 
lymphatics and lies immediately lateral to the pubic 
tubercle. The femoral nerve lies lateral to the femoral 
artery.
Identifying structures around the knee
The patella is a prominent palpable feature at the knee. The 
quadriceps femoris tendon attaches superiorly to it and 
the patellar ligament connects the inferior surface of the 
patella to the tibial tuberosity (Fig. 6.131). The patellar 
ligament and the tibial tuberosity are easily palpable. A tap 
on the patellar ligament (tendon) tests reflex activity 
mainly at spinal cord levels L3 and L4.
The head of the fibula is palpable as a protuberance on 
the lateral surface of the knee just inferior to the lateral 
condyle of the tibia. It can also be located by following the 
tendon of the biceps femoris inferiorly.
The common fibular nerve passes around the lateral 
surface of the neck of the fibula just inferior to the head 
and can often be felt as a cord-like structure in this 
position.
Another structure that can usually be located on the 
lateral side of the knee is the iliotibial tract. This flat tendi­
nous structure, which attaches to the lateral tibial condyle, 
is most prominent when the knee is fully extended. In this 
position, the anterior edge of the tract raises a sharp verti­
cal fold of skin posterior to the lateral edge of the patella.
Finding the femoral artery in the 
femoral triangle
The femoral artery passes into the femoral triangle 
(Fig. 6.130) of the lower limb from the abdomen.
The femoral triangle is the depression formed in the 
anterior thigh between the medial margin of the adductor 
Fig. 6.130  Position of the femoral artery in the femoral triangle. 
Anterior thigh. 
Inguinal ligament
Anterior superior iliac spine
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Lymphatics passing 
through femoral canal
Medial margin of
sartorius muscle
Medial margin of 
adductor longus 
muscle
Pubic tubercle
Pubic symphysis

=== PAGE 678 ===
6
661
Surface Anatomy  •  Identifying Structures Around the Knee
Fig. 6.131  Identifying structures around the knee. A. Anterior view of the right knee. B. Lateral view of the partially flexed right knee. 
C. Lateral view of the extended right knee, thigh, and gluteal region. 
A
B
C
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Quadriceps 
tendon
Quadriceps femoris muscle
Patella
Patella
Patellar
ligament
Patellar ligament
Tibial
 tuberosity
Tendon of
biceps femoris
Head of fibula
Common fibular
 nerve
Tensor 
fasciae latae
Iliotibial tract
Hamstring muscles
Gluteus
 maximus

=== PAGE 679 ===
Lower Limb
662
biceps femoris tendon and the common fibular nerve, 
which curves laterally out of the popliteal fossa and crosses 
the neck of the fibula just inferior to the head.
The popliteal fossa contains the popliteal artery, the 
popliteal vein, the tibial nerve, and the common fibular 
nerve (Fig. 6.132). The popliteal artery is the deepest of the 
structures in the fossa and descends through the region 
from the upper medial side. As a consequence of its posi­
tion, the popliteal artery pulse is difficult to find, but usually 
can be detected on deep palpation just medial to the midline 
of the fossa.
The small saphenous vein penetrates deep fascia 
in the upper part of the posterior leg and joins the pop­
liteal vein.
Visualizing the contents of the 
popliteal fossa
The popliteal fossa is a diamond-shaped depression formed 
between the hamstrings and gastrocnemius muscle poste­
rior to the knee. The inferior margins of the diamond are 
formed by the medial and lateral heads of the gastrocne­
mius muscle. The superior margins are formed laterally by 
the biceps femoris muscle and medially by the semimem­
branosus and semitendinosus muscles. The tendons of the 
biceps femoris muscle and the semitendinosus muscle are 
palpable and often visible.
The head of the fibula is palpable on the lateral side of 
the knee and can be used as a landmark for identifying the 
Fig. 6.132  Visualizing the contents of the popliteal fossa. Posterior view of the left knee. 
Popliteal fossa
Popliteal artery
Popliteal vein
Common fibular nerve
Biceps femoris muscle
 and tendon
Head of fibula
Penetrates deep fascia
Lateral head of
 gastrocnemius muscle
Medial head of 
gastrocnemius muscle
Tibial nerve
Semimembranosus 
muscle
Semitendinosus tendon
Small saphenous vein

=== PAGE 680 ===
6
663
Surface Anatomy  •  Finding the Tarsal Tunnel—the Gateway to the Foot
Fig. 6.133  Finding the tarsal tunnel—the gateway to the foot. 
Medial malleolus
Calcaneus
Flexor retinaculum
Flexor digitorum longus tendon
Tibialis posterior tendon
Flexor hallucis longus tendon
Tibial nerve
Tarsal tunnel
Posterior tibial artery
Finding the tarsal tunnel—the gateway to 
the foot
The tarsal tunnel (Fig. 6.133) is formed on the medial side 
of the foot in the groove between the medial malleolus and 
the heel (calcaneal tuberosity) and by the overlying flexor 
retinaculum.
The posterior tibial artery and tibial nerve enter the foot 
through the tarsal tunnel. The tendons of the tibialis pos­
terior, flexor digitorum longus, and flexor hallucis longus 
also pass through the tarsal tunnel in compartments 
formed by septa of the flexor retinaculum.
The order of structures passing through the tunnel 
from the anteromedial to posterolateral are the tendon of 
the tibialis posterior, the tendon of the flexor digitorum 
longus, the posterior tibial artery and associated veins, the 
tibial nerve, and the tendon of the flexor hallucis longus 
(“Tom, Dick, and a very nervous Harry”).
The tibial artery is palpable just posteroinferior to the 
medial malleolus on the anterior face of the visible groove 
between the heel and medial malleolus.

=== PAGE 681 ===
Lower Limb
664
it descends from the leg to the heel. A tap with a tendon 
hammer on this tendon tests reflex activity of spinal cord 
levels S1 and S2.
When the foot is everted, the tendons of the fibularis 
longus and fibularis brevis raise a linear fold of skin, which 
descends from the lower leg to the posterior edge of the 
lateral malleolus.
The tendon of the fibularis brevis is often evident on the 
lateral surface of the foot descending obliquely to the base 
of metatarsal V. The tendons of the fibularis tertius, 
Identifying tendons around the ankle and in 
the foot
Numerous tendons can be identified around the ankle and 
in the foot (Fig. 6.134) and can be used as useful landmarks 
for locating vessels or testing spinal reflexes.
The tibialis anterior tendon is visible on the medial side 
of the ankle anterior to the medial malleolus.
The calcaneal tendon is the largest tendon entering the 
foot and is prominent on the posterior aspect of the foot as 
Fig. 6.134  Identifying tendons around the ankle and in the foot. A. Medial side of the right foot. B. Posterior aspect of the right foot. C. Lateral 
side of the right foot. D. Dorsal aspect of the right foot. 
A
B
D
C
Medial malleolus
Lateral malleolus
Calcaneal tendon
Tibialis anterior tendon
Extensor
digitorum
longus tendons
Fibularis tertius tendon
Tibialis anterior
tendon
Extensor hallucis
longus tendon
Fibularis brevis tendon
Fibularis longus tendon
overlying fibularis
brevis tendon
Lateral malleolus

=== PAGE 682 ===
6
665
Surface Anatomy  •  Approximating the Position of the Plantar Arterial Arch
Approximating the position of the plantar 
arterial arch
The blood supply of the foot is provided by branches of the 
posterior tibial and dorsalis pedis arteries.
The posterior tibial artery enters the plantar surface of 
the foot through the tarsal tunnel and divides into a lateral 
and a medial plantar artery.
The lateral plantar artery curves laterally across the 
posterior half of the sole and then curves medially as the 
plantar arch (Fig. 6.136) through the anterior sole. 
Between the bases of metatarsals I and II, the plantar 
arch joins the terminal branch (deep plantar artery) of the 
dorsalis pedis artery. Most of the foot is supplied by the 
plantar arch.
The medial plantar artery passes anteriorly through the 
sole, connects with branches of the plantar arch, and sup­
plies the medial side of the great toe.
extensor digitorum longus, and extensor hallucis longus 
are visible on the dorsal aspect of the foot from lateral to 
medial.
Finding the dorsalis pedis artery
The nature of the dorsalis pedis pulse (Fig. 6.135) is impor­
tant for assessing peripheral circulation because the dorsa­
lis pedis artery is the farthest palpable vessel from the 
heart. Also, it is the lowest palpable artery in the body 
when a person is standing.
The dorsalis pedis artery passes onto the dorsal aspect 
of the foot and anteriorly over the tarsal bones where it lies 
between and is parallel to the tendon of the extensor hal­
lucis longus and the tendon of the extensor digitorum 
longus to the second toe. It is palpable in this position. The 
terminal branch of the dorsalis pedis artery passes into 
the plantar surface of the foot between the two heads of 
the first dorsal interosseous muscle.
Fig. 6.135  Finding the dorsalis pedis artery. 
Dorsalis pedis artery
Extensor digitorum
longus tendon to 
second toe
Extensor hallucis
longus tendon
Fig. 6.136  Position of the plantar arch. 
Connection with
dorsalis pedis artery
Plantar arch
Medial plantar artery
Lateral plantar artery
Flexor retinaculum

=== PAGE 683 ===
Lower Limb
666
This vein passes through an aperture in the fascia lata 
(saphenous ring) to join with the femoral vein in the 
femoral triangle.
The lateral side of the dorsal venous arch in the foot 
passes posterior to the lateral malleolus and up the poste­
rior surface of the leg as the small saphenous vein. This 
vessel passes through the deep fascia in the upper one-third 
of the leg and connects with the popliteal vein in the pop­
liteal fossa posterior to the knee.
Major superficial veins
Superficial veins in the lower limb often become enlarged. 
Also, because the veins are long, they can be removed and 
used elsewhere in the body as vascular grafts.
Superficial veins (Fig. 6.137) in the lower limb begin as 
a dorsal venous arch in the foot. The medial side of the arch 
curves superiorly anterior to the medial malleolus and 
passes up the leg and thigh as the great saphenous vein. 
Fig. 6.137  Major superficial veins. A. Dorsal aspect of the right foot. B. Anterior view of right lower limb. C. Posterior aspect of the left thigh, 
leg, and foot. 
A
B
C
Joins femoral vein
Saphenous ring
Dorsal
venous arch
Joins popliteal vein
Passes through
deep fascia
Small
saphenous vein
Great
saphenous vein

=== PAGE 684 ===
6
667
Surface Anatomy  •  Pulse Points
■	 posterior tibial pulse in the tarsal tunnel—posterior 
tibial artery posteroinferior to the medial malleolus in 
the groove between the medial malleolus and the heel 
(calcaneal tuberosity);
■	 dorsalis pedis pulse on the dorsal aspect of the foot—
dorsalis pedis artery as it passes distally over the tarsal 
bones between the tendon of the extensor hallucis 
longus and the tendon of the extensor digitorum longus 
to the second toe.
Pulse points
Peripheral pulses can be felt at four locations in the lower 
limb (Fig. 6.138):
■	 femoral pulse in the femoral triangle—femoral 
artery inferior to the inguinal ligament and midway 
between the anterior superior iliac spine and the pubic 
symphysis;
■	 popliteal pulse in the popliteal fossa—popliteal artery 
deep in the popliteal fossa near the midline;
Fig. 6.138  Where to feel peripheral arterial pulses in the lower limb. 
Femoral pulse
Posterior tibial pulse
Popliteal pulse
Dorsalis pedis pulse

=== PAGE 685 ===
Clinical cases
Case 1
KNEE JOINT INJURY
A young man was enjoying a long weekend skiing at a 
European ski resort. While racing a friend he caught an 
inner edge of his right ski. He lost his balance and fell. 
During his tumble he heard an audible “click.” After 
recovering from his spill, he developed tremendous pain in 
his right knee. He was unable to carry on skiing for that 
day, and by the time he returned to his chalet, his knee was 
significantly swollen. He went immediately to see an 
orthopedic surgeon.
The orthopedic surgeon carefully reviewed the mechanism 
of injury.
The man was skiing down the slope with both skis in 
parallel. The ankles were held rigid in the boots and the 
knees were slightly flexed. A momentary loss of 
concentration led to the skier catching the inner edge of his 
right ski. This effect was to force the boot and calf into 
external rotation. Furthermore, the knee was forced into a 
valgus position (bowed laterally away from the midline) and 
the skier tumbled. Both skis were detached from the boots 
as the bindings released them.
A series of structures within the knee joint were damaged 
sequentially.
As the knee went into external rotation and valgus, the 
anterior cruciate ligament became taut, acting as a fulcrum. 
The tibial collateral ligament was stressed and the lateral 
compartment of the knee compressed. As the force 
increased, the tibial collateral ligament was torn (Fig. 
6.139A,B), as was the medial meniscus (Fig. 6.140C). Finally, 
the anterior cruciate ligament, which was taut, gave way 
(Fig. 6.140A,B).
The joint became swollen some hours afterward.
Disruption of the anterior cruciate ligament characteristically 
produces marked joint swelling. The ligament is 
extrasynovial and intracapsular and has a rich blood supply. 
As the ligament was torn it ruptured into the joint. Blood 
from the tear irritates the synovial membrane and also 
enters the joint. These factors produce gradual swelling of 
the joint over the ensuing hours with significant fluid 
accumulation in the joint cavity.
The patient had a surgical reconstruction of the anterior 
cruciate ligament.
Fig. 6.139  A. Normal knee joint showing the tibial collateral ligament and the medial and lateral menisci. Proton density (PD)-weighted 
magnetic resonance image in the coronal plane. B. Knee joint showing a torn tibial collateral ligament. PD-weighted magnetic resonance 
image in the coronal plane. 
A
Femur
Tibial collateral
ligament
Medial
meniscus
Tibia
Lateral
meniscus
B
Torn tibial collateral ligament
Medial
meniscus
Lateral
meniscus
668
Lower Limb

=== PAGE 686 ===
Case 1—cont’d
It is difficult to find a man-made substance that can act in the 
same way as the anterior cruciate ligament and demonstrate 
the same physical properties. Surgeons have devised 
ingenious ways of reconstructing the anterior cruciate 
ligament. Two of the commonest methods use the patellar 
ligament (tendon) and hamstrings to reconstruct the ligament.
The patient had further surgical procedures.
The tibial collateral ligament was explored and resutured. 
Using arthroscopic techniques, the tear in the medial 
meniscus was débrided to prevent further complications.
Fig. 6.140  A. Knee joint showing an intact anterior cruciate ligament. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. 
B. Knee joint showing a torn anterior cruciate ligament. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. C. Knee joint showing 
a torn medial meniscus (the broken off portion of the posterior horn has moved into the anterior aspect of the joint giving the impression 
of a ‘double meniscus’ in this location). Proton density-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. 
A
Femur
Patella
Anterior cruciate ligament
Tibia
B
Femur
Torn anterior
cruciate ligament
Tibia
Anterior cruciate
ligament fragment
Patella
C
Medial femoral condyle
Torn posterior “horn”
of medial meniscus
Tibia
Anterior “horn” of medial meniscus
Displaced fragment of posterior horn
of medial meniscus
6
Clinical Cases  •  Case 1
669

=== PAGE 687 ===
Case 2
OSTEOMYELITIS
A 45-year-old man with diabetes mellitus visited his nurse 
because he had an ulcer on his foot that was not healing 
despite daily dressings.
Diabetes can lead to vascular disease of large and medium 
arteries, narrowing the lumen and reducing blood supply to the 
extremities, thereby impairing healing. In addition, diabetes can 
also affect blood supply to nerves, which leads to peripheral 
neuropathy. Peripheral neuropathy results in reduced sensation, 
and therefore minor injuries can often go unnoticed.
This patient has developed an ulcer on his heel, which is a 
pressure point and likely to be under repeated strain. The 
nurse examined the ulcer and found that the ulcer was 
looking infected with pus at the base of the ulcer and asked 
for a specialist orthopedic opinion, who requested an x-ray 
and an MRI. The MRI and x-ray both demonstrated infection 
invading into the calcaneus with destruction of the bone 
(Fig. 6.141A,B).
The patient required surgical washout with removal of the 
dead and infected bone (debridement) and was given 
long-term antibiotic treatment (Fig. 6.141C).
Fig. 6.141  Radiograph (A) and MRI (B) of soft tissue ulceration 
and erosion in the adjacent calcaneus. After debridement and 
placement of antibiotics beads in the wound there is progressive 
healing (C). 
Osteomyelitis 
calcaneus
A
Osteomyelitis 
calcaneus
B
C
Lower Limb
670

=== PAGE 688 ===
6
Clinical Cases  •  Case 3
670.e1
Case 3
VARICOSE VEINS
A young woman came to a vascular surgeon with a series 
of large dilated tortuous veins in her right leg. The rest of 
her leg was otherwise unremarkable.
A diagnosis of varicose veins was made and the surgeon 
needed to determine the site of valvular incompetence.
There are typical points where incompetent valves occur 
between the superficial and the deep veins. In these regions 
the varicosities tend to become marked. The typical sites 
are:
■	 at the saphena varix—the saphenofemoral junction 
where the femoral vein is joined by the great saphenous 
vein;
■	 in the midthigh perforating vein between the great 
saphenous vein and the femoral vein;
■	 in the calf the three sites where perforators occur, 5, 10, 
and 15 cm above the medial malleolus between the great 
saphenous vein and the deep veins of the calf; and
■	 at the junction of the small saphenous vein and the 
popliteal vein.
The surgeon asked the patient to lie supine on the bed and 
elevated the leg. A tourniquet was placed around the upper 
thigh below the saphenofemoral junction and the patient 
was asked to stand up. No veins were demonstrated filling 
on the medial aspect of the thigh and lower limb.
The effect of the tourniquet is to compress the great 
saphenous vein while permitting blood to flow in the deep 
venous system of the femoral vein and the deep femoral 
vein.
Because there was no filling of the medial varicose veins 
below the level of the tourniquet, the surgeon assumed that 
the valve at the saphenofemoral junction was incompetent 
and would require surgical treatment.
However, during the tourniquet maneuver the surgeon also 
noted some veins around the posterior and posterolateral 
aspect of the calf.
A similar technique was performed by application of a 
tourniquet just below the level of the knee joint while the 
leg was elevated. The patient stood up and no veins were 
demonstrated filling in the posterior and posterolateral 
aspect of the calf. These findings suggested to the surgeon 
that there was also incompetence of the valve for the small 
saphenous system where it anastomoses with the popliteal 
vein.
Surgery was planned.
A small transverse incision was made below the level of the 
inguinal ligament where the great saphenous vein passes 
through the saphenous ring in the deep fascia. This can be 
easily palpated as a small circular defect in the fascia. The 
saphenofemoral junction was identified and the great 
saphenous vein was ligated, at its anastomosis with the 
femoral vein. The great saphenous vein was stripped using 
special surgical techniques and removed.
The patient was placed prone for the second part of the 
operation.
A small incision was made transversely at the level of the 
skin crease in the popliteal fossa. However, the surgeon had 
difficulty identifying the junction between the small 
saphenous vein and the popliteal vein. After considerable 
time the surgeon located what he thought was the small 
saphenous vein and the structure was ligated and the 
wound closed.
The following day the patient was sent home, but returned 
to the clinic after 2 weeks complaining of problems walking. 
On examination there was absence of dorsiflexion, a 
sensory disturbance over the lateral aspect of the leg and 
(continues)

=== PAGE 689 ===
Lower Limb
670.e2
Case 3—cont’d
foot, and obvious wasting of the fibular muscles. As the 
patient walked, the foot was dragged between steps. A 
clinical diagnosis of footdrop was made and a common 
fibular nerve injury was diagnosed. The injury occurred at 
the time of surgery.
Within the popliteal fossa are the popliteal artery, popliteal 
vein, and sciatic nerve (and its divisions). The popliteal artery 
is the deepest structure. The popliteal vein is superficial to 
the artery and the sciatic nerve is superficial to the vein 
(eFig. 6.142). Importantly, the sciatic nerve divides at the 
apex of the popliteal fossa. The tibial nerve continues into 
the lower popliteal fossa. The common fibular nerve passes 
laterally adjacent to the biceps femoris muscle to become 
superficial and wrap around the fibula neck.
It was concluded that the surgeon had accidentally ligated 
the common fibular nerve rather than the small saphenous 
vein, thus producing this patient’s symptoms.
eFig. 6.142  Popliteal fossa showing position of the popliteal 
artery and vein and sciatic nerve. T1-weighted magnetic 
resonance image in the axial plane. 
Sartorius
Semitendinosus
Gracilis
Semimembranosus
Biceps femoris
Tibial nerve
Common fibular
nerve
Popliteal artery
Popliteal vein
Patella
Vastus medialis
Femur

=== PAGE 690 ===
6
Clinical Cases  •  Case 4
670.e3
Case 4
FRACTURE OF NECK OF FEMUR
A 72-year-old woman was admitted to the emergency room 
after falling at home. She complained of a severe pain in 
her right hip and had noticeable bruising on the right side 
of the face.
On admission it was noted that the patient’s right leg was 
shorter than her left leg and externally rotated.
An initial series of investigations was carried out, including a 
plain radiograph of the pelvis.
The plain radiograph of the pelvis demonstrated a displaced 
fracture through the right neck of the femur.
The apparent shortening and external rotation of the leg on 
clinical examination were accounted for by spasm of the 
muscles connecting the pelvis to the trochanters and 
proximal femur. Of the muscles that surround the hip joint 
the largest group is the adductor group (adductor longus, 
brevis, and magnus) and the psoas major. The psoas major 
inserts onto the lesser trochanter and its action is to 
externally rotate and flex the hip. The fulcrum of action of 
the psoas major is the femoral head in the acetabulum. 
However, when the femoral neck is detached its overriding 
action pulls the femur proximally and into external rotation. 
The external rotation is exacerbated by the spasm in the 
adductor muscles.
Extensive medical testing was necessary before surgery. It is 
important to remember that elderly patients may have a 
number of coexisting diseases.
The patient then underwent a hemiarthroplasty.
Hemiarthroplasty is a surgical procedure in which the 
femoral head is removed from the acetabulum. The femoral 
neck is trimmed close to the trochanters and the medullary 
cavity of the femoral shaft is reamed. A metal hip prosthesis 
is inserted into the medullary cavity of the femur and the 
head of the prosthesis is placed into the acetabulum, in 
which it articulates. Importantly, the acetabulum is not 
replaced in straightforward cases, though a prosthetic 
acetabulum may be inserted if clinically appropriate.
An arthroplasty was the only procedure that could be 
performed.
The blood supply to the femoral head is from three 
sources—the artery within the ligament of the head of the 
femur, vessels in the medullary cavity, and vessels deep to 
the synovium running in the retinacula of the fibrous capsule 
of the hip joint. With increasing age, the medullary cavity 
undergoes fatty replacement of the normal red marrow, thus 
attenuating the medullary blood supply. The artery within 
the ligament of the head of the femur also becomes 
attenuated and this is often associated with atherosclerotic 
arterial disease.
Unfortunately for this patient, the sole blood supply to the 
head of the femur was via the vessels in the retinacula 
fibers, which were transected at the time of the fracture. If 
the patient had an intertrochanteric fracture instead, the 
vessels of the retinacula fibers would not have been 
damaged and a different approach to surgical fixation could 
be undertaken without the need for a hemiarthroplasty.
The patient has osteoporosis.
Osteoporosis is a common condition affecting older people, 
but is significantly more frequent in postmenopausal 
women. Many fractures of the femoral neck in elderly 
patients occur because the strength of the bone is 
significantly reduced when it is osteoporotic. Other common 
sites for osteoporotic fractures include the distal radius and 
the thoracic and lumbar vertebrae.

=== PAGE 691 ===
Lower Limb
670.e4
Case 5
DEEP VEIN THROMBOSIS
A 28-year-old woman was seen by her family practitioner 
for a routine pregnancy checkup at 36 weeks’ gestational 
age. Neither the patient nor the family physician had any 
concerns about the pregnancy. However, the patient did 
complain of unilateral swelling of her left leg, which had 
gradually increased over the previous 2 days. Furthermore, 
the evening before her visit she developed some sharp 
chest pain, which was exacerbated by deep breaths.
The family physician ordered a duplex ultrasound scan of the 
left leg venous system.
Ultrasound scanning of the vascular tree can demonstrate 
flow and occlusion of arteries and veins.
The probe was placed over the left femoral vein and no flow 
was demonstrated. Furthermore, the vein could not be 
compressed, and no alteration of flow with breathing could 
be demonstrated. Some flow was demonstrated in the deep 
femoral vein and in the great saphenous vein. No flow was 
demonstrated throughout the length of the left femoral vein, 
the popliteal vein, and the tibial veins.
The technician scanned the opposite side, where excellent 
flow was demonstrated within the right femoral venous 
system. In addition, when the calf was gently massaged an 
augmentation to the flow was noted. It was possible to 
demonstrate alteration of flow with respiratory excursion 
and venous compression was satisfactory. A diagnosis of 
extensive left-sided deep vein thrombosis was made.
Certain patients are more prone to deep vein thrombosis.
Three major factors predispose a patient to thrombosis:
■	 reduced or stagnant blood flow in the veins—significant 
stasis of blood (which may be due to lack of movement), 
reduced muscular calf pump effect, and obstruction to 
flow may occur;
■	 injury to the vein wall—venous trauma may damage the 
vessel walls, promoting thrombus formation;
■	 hypercoagulability of the blood—hypercoagulable states 
are often associated with abnormal levels of certain 
clotting factors, such as antithrombin III, protein C, and 
protein S.
In this patient, compression of the left external iliac veins by 
the gravid uterus was the likely cause of stasis, which led to 
the deep vein thrombosis.
The chest pain was due to pulmonary emboli.
Small emboli were thrown off from the leading edge of the 
thrombus through the heart to lodge in the lungs. Small 
emboli cause typical pleuritic chest pain, which is 
exacerbated by breathing. In isolation these small pulmonary 
emboli may affect respiratory function, but they may be the 
precursor to a large and potentially fatal pulmonary embolus 
(eFig. 6.143).
Anticoagulation was instituted and the patient had an 
uneventful delivery.
eFig. 6.143  Pulmonary embolus. Axial computed tomogram. 
Left atrium
Aorta
Right inferior pulmonary 
artery with embolus
Embolus

=== PAGE 692 ===
6
Clinical Cases  •  Case 6
670.e5
Case 6
RUPTURED CALCANEAL TENDON
A 45-year-old man had recently taken up squash. During a 
game he attempted a forehand shot and noticed severe 
sudden pain in his heel. He thought his opponent had hit 
him with his racket. When he turned, though, he realized 
his opponent was too far away to have hit him.
Within minutes there was marked swelling of the ankle. The 
patient was unable to plantarflex his foot and had to stop 
the game. Afterward an appreciable subcutaneous 
hematoma developed in the ankle.
The diagnostic possibilities include a bone or soft tissue 
injury.
A bony injury was excluded because there was no bone 
tenderness.
The patient had a significant soft tissue injury. On 
examination he had significant swelling of the ankle with a 
subcutaneous hematoma. He was unable to stand on tiptoe 
on the right leg, and in the prone position a palpable defect 
was demonstrated within the calcaneal tendon.
A diagnosis of calcaneal tendon rupture was made.
This patient has a typical history of ruptured calcaneal 
tendon and the clinical findings support this. Magnetic 
resonance imaging was carried out and confirmed the 
diagnosis (eFig. 6.144).
The patient underwent an operative repair.
The tendon healed well, though the patient has not gone 
back to playing squash.
eFig. 6.144  Ankle showing a ruptured calcaneal tendon. 
T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the sagittal plane. 
Talus
Calcaneus
Ruptured calcaneal tendon

=== PAGE 693 ===
Lower Limb
670.e6
Case 7
POPLITEAL ARTERY ANEURYSM
A 67-year-old man was noted to have a mass at the back of 
his knee. The mass measured approximately 4 cm in 
transverse diameter. The patient was otherwise fit and well 
and had no other history of note.
The mass was arising from one of the structures in the 
popliteal fossa.
Within the popliteal fossa there is a neurovascular bundle 
that contains the sciatic nerve (and its two divisions), the 
popliteal artery and the popliteal vein. There are also 
numerous small bursae associated with the posterior aspect 
of the knee joint and the muscles and tendons in this 
region. It is possible that this mass is arising from the 
posterior structures of the knee joint, which include synovial 
outpouchings, the menisci, and the muscles and tendons of 
this region.
The commonest masses demonstrated within the popliteal 
fossa are a popliteal cyst, a popliteal aneurysm, and an 
arterial adventitial cyst.
Further clinical examination revealed that this mass was 
pulsatile and demonstrated a bruit (an audible rumbling 
made by turbulent blood flow) on auscultation.
A diagnosis of popliteal artery aneurysm was made.
A popliteal artery aneurysm is an abnormal dilation of the 
popliteal artery. It is unusual for it to be greater than 5 cm 
because symptoms usually develop before it reaches this 
size.
Unlike aneurysms elsewhere in the body, the natural history 
of popliteal aneurysms is to embolize, with the mural 
thrombus producing ischemia distal to the lesion, rather than 
rupture. It is mandatory to examine the rest of the arterial 
tree in patients with a popliteal aneurysm because 
aneurysms may be bilateral and there is an association with 
abdominal aortic aneurysms.
The other diagnostic possibilities include a popliteal cyst and 
an adventitial cyst.
A popliteal cyst (Baker’s cyst) is a synovial outpouching that 
arises from the posteromedial aspect of the knee joint. The 
synovial membrane of the knee joint outpouches between 
the medial head of the gastrocnemius and the 
semimembranosus tendon to lie medially within the 
popliteal fossa. Occasionally it tracks inferiorly to lie in and 
around the tendons that form the pes anserinus (sartorius, 
gracilis, and semitendinosus).
An arterial adventitial cyst is an uncommon cystic structure 
that arises from the wall of the artery.
An ultrasound investigation was carried out.
Using real-time ultrasound the dimensions of the popliteal 
aneurysm were characterized and the flow in the vessels 
was demonstrated. Furthermore, a popliteal cyst and 
adventitial cyst were completely excluded.
The patient underwent a surgical excision and graft 
interposition and has made an uneventful recovery.

=== PAGE 694 ===
6
Clinical Cases  •  Case 8
670.e7
Case 8
ANTERIOR TALOFIBULAR LIGAMENT TEAR
A young long-distance runner came to her physician with 
acute swelling around the lateral aspect of her ankle. This 
injury occurred directly after accidentally running into a 
pothole in the pavement.
A fractured ankle was suspected.
Plain anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the ankle 
revealed no evidence of any bone injury to account for the 
patient’s soft tissue swelling.
The patient was given a pair of crutches and analgesics and 
told to rest. A diagnosis of a simple sprain was made.
Over the ensuing weeks the swelling and edema within the 
soft tissue of the ankle decreased and the patient began to 
run, but noted that the ankle kept “giving way.” She went to 
an orthopedic surgeon for further assessment.
There was a positive anterior drawer test of the ankle joint.
At this stage it is important to review the mechanism of 
injury. Typically when running on a hard surface the final 
phase of push-off involves supination of the foot. If the foot 
is caught in a pothole or divot, this supinating maneuver 
continues and inverts the ankle joint in plantarflexion. This 
puts significant strain on the lateral ligament complex and, 
given the appropriate circumstances, disruption (in order) of 
the ligament structures occurs from anterior to posterior. 
First, the anterior talofibular ligament is disrupted, followed 
by the calcaneofibular ligament, and then the posterior 
talofibular ligament. As each of these ligaments is disrupted, 
the severity of the soft tissue injury is significantly enhanced 
and the chance of permanent ankle instability is increased.
On examination any positive anterior drawer test of the 
ankle (4–5 mm compared to the opposite side) suggests an 
injury to the anterior talofibular ligament.
The anterior talofibular ligament can be assessed by placing 
the foot in marked plantarflexion. If there is over 10° of 
difference between the affected foot and nonaffected foot, 
an anterior talofibular ligament disruption is suspected.
It is extremely rare for all three ligaments to be disrupted, 
and if so there are usually other significant ankle injuries.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was carried out to assess 
ligament damage.
MRI is excellent for demonstrating the medial and lateral 
ligament complexes of the ankle as well as the soft tissues 
that support the bones of the posterior foot.
Unfortunately for this patient there was a tear of the anterior 
talofibular ligament (eFig. 6.145), which had to be repaired 
surgically.
(continues)

=== PAGE 695 ===
Lower Limb
670.e8
Case 8—cont’d
eFig. 6.145  A. Normal ankle joint showing an intact anterior talofibular ligament. T1-weighted magnetic resonance image in the axial 
plane. B. Ankle joint showing a torn anterior talofibular ligament. T2-weighted magnetic resonance image in the axial plane. 
B
Fibula
Calcaneal tendon
Torn anterior talofibular ligament
Tibia
A
Talus
Fibula
Calcaneal tendon
Normal anterior talofibular ligament

=== PAGE 696 ===
Upper Limb
672
Muscles    795
Arteries and veins    801
Nerves    805
Surface anatomy    810
Upper limb surface anatomy    810
Bony landmarks and muscles of the posterior scapular 
region    810
Visualizing the axilla and locating contents and related 
structures    811
Locating the brachial artery in the arm    812
The triceps brachii tendon and position of the radial 
nerve    813
Cubital fossa (anterior view)    813
Identifying tendons and locating major vessels and 
nerves in the distal forearm    815
Normal appearance of the hand    816
Position of the flexor retinaculum and the recurrent 
branch of the median nerve    817
Motor function of the median and ulnar nerves in the 
hand    817
Visualizing the positions of the superficial and deep 
palmar arches    818
Pulse points    818
Clinical cases    820
Arm    739
Bones    740
Muscles    743
Arteries and veins    745
Nerves    749
Elbow joint    753
Cubital fossa    758
Forearm    761
Bones    763
Joints    764
Anterior compartment of the forearm    766
Muscles    766
Arteries and veins    772
Nerves    774
Posterior compartment of the forearm    775
Muscles    775
Arteries and veins    781
Nerves    782
Hand    782
Bones    783
Joints    785
Carpal tunnel and structures at the wrist    788
Palmar aponeurosis    791
Palmaris brevis    791
Anatomical snuffbox    791
Fibrous digital sheaths    792
Extensor hoods    793
