=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
Body Systems  •  Muscular System
1
23
SKIN AND FASCIAS
Skin
The skin is the largest organ of the body. It consists of the 
epidermis and the dermis. The epidermis is the outer cel­
lular layer of stratified squamous epithelium, which is 
avascular and varies in thickness. The dermis is a dense bed 
of vascular connective tissue.
The skin functions as a mechanical and permeability 
barrier, and as a sensory and thermoregulatory organ. It 
also can initiate primary immune responses.
Fascia
Fascia is connective tissue containing varying amounts of 
fat that separate, support, and interconnect organs and 
structures, enable movement of one structure relative to 
another, and allow the transit of vessels and nerves from 
one area to another. There are two general categories of 
fascia: superficial and deep.
■	 Superficial (subcutaneous) fascia lies just deep to and is 
attached to the dermis of the skin. It is made up of loose 
connective tissue usually containing a large amount of 
fat. The thickness of the superficial fascia (subcutane­
ous tissue) varies considerably, both from one area of 
the body to another and from one individual to another. 
The superficial fascia allows movement of the skin over 
deeper areas of the body, acts as a conduit for vessels and 
nerves coursing to and from the skin, and serves as an 
energy (fat) reservoir.
■	 Deep fascia usually consists of dense, organized connec­
tive tissue. The outer layer of deep fascia is attached to 
the deep surface of the superficial fascia and forms a 
thin fibrous covering over most of the deeper region of 
the body. Inward extensions of this fascial layer form 
intermuscular septa that compartmentalize groups of 
muscles with similar functions and innervations. Other 
extensions surround individual muscles and groups of 
vessels and nerves, forming an investing fascia. Near 
some joints the deep fascia thickens, forming retinacula. 
These fascial retinacula hold tendons in place and 
prevent them from bowing during movements at the 
joints. Finally, there is a layer of deep fascia separating 
the membrane lining the abdominal cavity (the parietal 
peritoneum) from the fascia covering the deep surface 
of the muscles of the abdominal wall (the transversalis 
fascia). This layer is referred to as extraperitoneal 
fascia. A similar layer of fascia in the thorax is termed 
the endothoracic fascia.
In the clinic
The importance of fascias
A fascia is a thin band of tissue that surrounds muscles, 
bones, organs, nerves, and blood vessels and often 
remains uninterrupted as a 3D structure between tissues. It 
provides important support for tissues and can provide a 
boundary between structures.
Clinically, fascias are extremely important because they 
often limit the spread of infection and malignant disease. 
When infections or malignant diseases cross a fascial 
plain, a primary surgical clearance may require a far more 
extensive dissection to render the area free of tumor or 
infection.
A typical example of the clinical importance of a fascial 
layer would be of that covering the psoas muscle. 
Infection within an intervertebral body secondary to 
tuberculosis can pass laterally into the psoas muscle. Pus 
fills the psoas muscle but is limited from further spread by 
the psoas fascia, which surrounds the muscle and extends 
inferiorly into the groin pointing below the inguinal 
ligament.
In the clinic
Placement of skin incisions and scarring
Surgical skin incisions are ideally placed along or parallel 
to Langer’s lines, which are lines of skin tension that 
correspond to the orientation of the dermal collagen 
fibers. They tend to run in the same direction as the 
underlying muscle fibers and incisions that are made 
along these lines tend to heal better with less scarring. In 
contrast, incisions made perpendicular to Langer’s lines 
are more likely to heal with a prominent scar and in some 
severe cases can lead to raised, firm, hypertrophic, or 
keloid, scars.
MUSCULAR SYSTEM
The muscular system is generally regarded as consisting of 
one type of muscle found in the body—skeletal muscle. 
However, there are two other types of muscle tissue found 
in the body, smooth muscle and cardiac muscle, that are 
important components of other systems. These three types 
of muscle can be characterized by whether they are con­
trolled voluntarily or involuntarily, whether they appear 
striated (striped) or smooth, and whether they are associ­
ated with the body wall (somatic) or with organs and blood 
vessels (visceral).
■	 Skeletal muscle forms the majority of the muscle tissue 
in the body. It consists of parallel bundles of long, 

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
The Body
24
multinucleated fibers with transverse stripes, is capable 
of powerful contractions, and is innervated by somatic 
and branchial motor nerves. This muscle is used to 
move bones and other structures, and provides support 
and gives form to the body. Individual skeletal muscles 
are often named on the basis of shape (e.g., rhomboid 
major muscle), attachments (e.g., sternohyoid muscle), 
function (e.g., flexor pollicis longus muscle), position 
(e.g., palmar interosseous muscle), or fiber orientation 
(e.g., external oblique muscle).
■	 Cardiac muscle is striated muscle found only in the walls 
of the heart (myocardium) and in some of the large 
vessels close to where they join the heart. It consists of 
a branching network of individual cells linked electri­
cally and mechanically to work as a unit. Its contrac­
tions are less powerful than those of skeletal muscle and 
it is resistant to fatigue. Cardiac muscle is innervated by 
visceral motor nerves.
■	 Smooth muscle (absence of stripes) consists of elongated 
or spindle-shaped fibers capable of slow and sustained 
contractions. It is found in the walls of blood vessels 
(tunica media), associated with hair follicles in the skin, 
located in the eyeball, and found in the walls of various 
structures associated with the gastrointestinal, respira­
tory, genitourinary, and urogenital systems. Smooth 
muscle is innervated by visceral motor nerves.
In the clinic
Muscle injuries and strains
Muscle injuries and strains tend to occur in specific muscle 
groups and usually are related to a sudden exertion and 
muscle disruption. They typically occur in athletes.
Muscle tears may involve a small interstitial injury up to a 
complete muscle disruption (Fig. 1.26). It is important to 
identify which muscle groups are affected and the extent of 
the tear to facilitate treatment and obtain a prognosis, which 
will determine the length of rehabilitation necessary to 
return to normal activity.
Fig. 1.26  Axial inversion recovery MR imaging 
series, which suppresses fat and soft tissue and 
leaves high signal intensity where fluid is seen. 
A muscle tear in the right adductor longus with 
edema in and around the muscle is shown. 
Torn right adductor longus
Normal left adductor longus
In the clinic
Muscle paralysis
Muscle paralysis is the inability to move a specific muscle 
or muscle group and may be associated with other 
neurological abnormalities, including loss of sensation. 
Major causes include stroke, trauma, poliomyelitis, and 
iatrogenic factors. Paralysis may be due to abnormalities 
in the brain, the spinal cord, and the nerves supplying the 
muscles.
In the long term, muscle paralysis will produce 
secondary muscle wasting and overall atrophy of the 
region due to disuse.
In the clinic
Muscle atrophy
Muscle atrophy is a wasting disorder of muscle. It can be 
produced by a variety of causes, which include nerve 
damage to the muscle and disuse.
Muscle atrophy is an important problem in patients 
who have undergone long-term rest or disuse, requiring 
extensive rehabilitation and muscle building exercises to 
maintain normal activities of daily living.

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
Body Systems  •  Cardiovascular System
1
25
Examples of large veins are the superior vena cava, the 
inferior vena cava, and the portal vein.
■	 Small and medium veins contain small amounts of 
smooth muscle, and the thickest layer is the tunica 
externa. Examples of small and medium veins are 
superficial veins in the upper and lower limbs and 
deeper veins of the leg and forearm.
■	 Venules are the smallest veins and drain the 
capillaries.
Although veins are similar in general structure to arter­
ies, they have a number of distinguishing features.
■	 The walls of veins, specifically the tunica media, are 
thin.
■	 The luminal diameters of veins are large.
■	 There often are multiple veins (venae comitantes) closely 
associated with arteries in peripheral regions.
■	 Valves often are present in veins, particularly in periph­
eral vessels inferior to the level of the heart. These are 
usually paired cusps that facilitate blood flow toward 
the heart.
More specific information about the cardiovascular 
system and how it relates to the circulation of blood 
throughout the body will be discussed, where appropriate, 
in each of the succeeding chapters of the text.
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
The cardiovascular system consists of the heart, which 
pumps blood throughout the body, and the blood vessels, 
which are a closed network of tubes that transport the 
blood. There are three types of blood vessels:
■	 arteries, which transport blood away from the heart;
■	 veins, which transport blood toward the heart;
■	 capillaries, which connect the arteries and veins, are the 
smallest of the blood vessels and are where oxygen, 
nutrients, and wastes are exchanged within the tissues.
The walls of the blood vessels of the cardiovascular 
system usually consist of three layers or tunics:
■	 tunica externa (adventitia)—the outer connective tissue 
layer,
■	 tunica media—the middle smooth muscle layer (may 
also contain varying amounts of elastic fibers in medium 
and large arteries), and
■	 tunica intima—the inner endothelial lining of the blood 
vessels.
Arteries are usually further subdivided into three 
classes, according to the variable amounts of smooth 
muscle and elastic fibers contributing to the thickness of 
the tunica media, the overall size of the vessel, and its 
function.
■	 Large elastic arteries contain substantial amounts of 
elastic fibers in the tunica media, allowing expansion 
and recoil during the normal cardiac cycle. This helps 
maintain a constant flow of blood during diastole. 
Examples of large elastic arteries are the aorta, the 
brachiocephalic trunk, the left common carotid artery, 
the left subclavian artery, and the pulmonary trunk.
■	 Medium muscular arteries are composed of a tunica 
media that contains mostly smooth muscle fibers. This 
characteristic allows these vessels to regulate their 
diameter and control the flow of blood to different parts 
of the body. Examples of medium muscular arteries are 
most of the named arteries, including the femoral, axil­
lary, and radial arteries.
■	 Small arteries and arterioles control the filling of the 
capillaries and directly contribute to the arterial pres­
sure in the vascular system.
Veins also are subdivided into three classes.
■	 Large veins contain some smooth muscle in the tunica 
media, but the thickest layer is the tunica externa. 
In the clinic
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is a disease that affects arteries. There is a 
chronic inflammatory reaction in the walls of the arteries, 
with deposition of cholesterol and fatty proteins. This may 
in turn lead to secondary calcification, with reduction in 
the diameter of the vessels impeding distal flow. The 
plaque itself may be a site for attraction of platelets that 
may “fall off” (embolize) distally. Plaque fissuring may 
occur, which allows fresh clots to form and occlude the 
vessel.
The importance of atherosclerosis and its effects 
depend upon which vessel is affected. If atherosclerosis 
occurs in the carotid artery, small emboli may form and 
produce a stroke. In the heart, plaque fissuring may 
produce an acute vessel thrombosis, producing a 
myocardial infarction (heart attack). In the legs, chronic 
narrowing of vessels may limit the ability of the patient to 
walk and ultimately cause distal ischemia and gangrene of 
the toes.

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
The Body
26
In the clinic
Varicose veins
Varicose veins are tortuous dilated veins that typically occur 
in the legs, although they may occur in the superficial veins 
of the arm and in other organs.
In normal individuals the movement of adjacent leg 
muscles pumps the blood in the veins to the heart. Blood is 
also pumped from the superficial veins through the investing 
layer of fascia of the leg into the deep veins. Valves in these 
perforating veins may become damaged, allowing blood to 
pass in the opposite direction. This increased volume and 
pressure produces dilatation and tortuosity of the superficial 
veins (Fig. 1.27). Apart from the unsightliness of larger veins, 
the skin may become pigmented and atrophic with a poor 
response to tissue trauma. In some patients even small 
trauma may produce skin ulceration, which requires 
elevation of the limb and application of pressure bandages 
to heal.
Treatment of varicose veins depends on their location, 
size, and severity. Typically the superficial varicose veins can 
be excised and stripped, allowing blood only to drain into 
the deep system.
Fig. 1.27  Photograph demonstrating varicose veins. 
Varicose veins
In the clinic
Anastomoses and collateral circulation
All organs require a blood supply from the arteries and 
drainage by veins. Within most organs there are multiple 
ways of perfusing the tissue such that if the main vessel 
feeding the organ or vein draining the organ is blocked, a 
series of smaller vessels (collateral vessels) continue to 
supply and drain the organ.
In certain circumstances, organs have more than one 
vessel perfusing them, such as the hand, which is supplied 
by the radial and ulnar arteries. Loss of either the radial or 
the ulnar artery may not produce any symptoms of reduced 
perfusion to the hand.
There are circumstances in which loss of a vein produces 
significant venous collateralization. Some of these venous 
collaterals become susceptible to bleeding. This is a 
considerable problem in patients who have undergone portal 
vein thrombosis or occlusion, where venous drainage from 
the gut bypasses the liver through collateral veins to return 
to the systemic circulation.
Normal vascular anastomoses associated with an organ 
are important. Some organs, such as the duodenum, have a 
dual blood supply arising from the branches of the celiac 
trunk and also from the branches of the superior mesenteric 
artery. Should either of these vessels be damaged, blood 
supply will be maintained to the organ. The brain has 
multiple vessels supplying it, dominated by the carotid 
arteries and the vertebral arteries. Vessels within the brain 
are end arteries and have a poor collateral circulation; hence 
any occlusion will produce long-term cerebral damage.

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
Body Systems  •  Lymphatic System
1
27
interstitial fluid, the chylomicrons drain into lymphatic 
capillaries (known as lacteals in the small intestine) and 
are ultimately delivered to the venous system in the neck. 
The lymphatic system is therefore also a major route of 
transport for fat absorbed by the gut.
The fluid in most lymphatic vessels is clear and colorless 
and is known as lymph. That carried by lymphatic vessels 
from the small intestine is opaque and milky because of the 
presence of chylomicrons and is termed chyle.
There are lymphatic vessels in most areas of the body, 
including those associated with the central nervous system 
(Louveau A et al., Nature 2015; 523:337-41; Aspelund A 
et al., J Exp Med 2015; 212:991-9). Exceptions include 
bone marrow and avascular tissues such as epithelia and 
cartilage.
The movement of lymph through the lymphatic vessels 
is generated mainly by the indirect action of adjacent 
structures, particularly by contraction of skeletal muscles 
and pulses in arteries. Unidirectional flow is maintained by 
the presence of valves in the vessels.
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
Lymphatic vessels
Lymphatic vessels form an extensive and complex inter­
connected network of channels, which begin as “porous” 
blind-ended lymphatic capillaries in tissues of the body 
and converge to form a number of larger vessels, which 
ultimately connect with large veins in the root of the neck.
Lymphatic vessels mainly collect fluid lost from vascular 
capillary beds during nutrient exchange processes and 
deliver it back to the venous side of the vascular system 
(Fig. 1.28). Also included in this interstitial fluid that drains 
into the lymphatic capillaries are pathogens, cells of the 
lymphocytic system, cell products (such as hormones), and 
cell debris.
In the small intestine, certain fats absorbed and pro­
cessed by the intestinal epithelium are packaged into 
protein-coated lipid droplets (chylomicrons), which are 
released from the epithelial cells and enter the interstitial 
compartment. Together with other components of the 
Fig. 1.28  Lymphatic vessels mainly collect fluid lost from vascular capillary beds during nutrient exchange processes and deliver it back to the 
venous side of the vascular system. 
Heart
Capillary bed
Lymphatic capillaries
Interstitial fluid
Cells
Lymph vessel
carrying lymph
Lymph node
Capsule
Lymphoid tissue
(containing lymphocytes
 and macrophages)
Blood vessels
Pathogens
Cell products
and debris

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
The Body
28
Lymph nodes
Lymph nodes are small (0.1–2.5 cm long) encapsulated 
structures that interrupt the course of lymphatic vessels 
and contain elements of the body’s defense system, such 
as clusters of lymphocytes and macrophages. They act as 
elaborate filters that trap and phagocytose particulate 
matter in the lymph that percolates through them. In addi­
tion, they detect and defend against foreign antigens that 
are also carried in the lymph (Fig. 1.28).
Because lymph nodes are efficient filters and flow 
through them is slow, cells that metastasize from 
(migrate away from) primary tumors and enter lymphatic 
vessels often lodge and grow as secondary tumors in 
lymph nodes. Lymph nodes that drain regions that are 
infected or contain other forms of disease can enlarge 
or undergo certain physical changes, such as becoming 
“hard” or “tender.” These changes can be used by clini­
cians to detect pathologic changes or to track spread of 
disease.
A number of regions in the body are associated with 
clusters or a particular abundance of lymph nodes (Fig. 
1.29). Not surprisingly, nodes in many of these regions 
drain the body’s surface, the digestive system, or the respi­
ratory system. All three of these areas are high-risk sites 
for the entry of foreign pathogens.
Lymph nodes are abundant and accessible to palpation 
in the axilla, the groin and femoral region, and the neck. 
Deep sites that are not palpable include those associated 
with the trachea and bronchi in the thorax, and with the 
aorta and its branches in the abdomen.
Lymphatic trunks and ducts
All lymphatic vessels coalesce to form larger trunks 
or ducts, which drain into the venous system at sites in 
the neck where the internal jugular veins join the 
subclavian veins to form the brachiocephalic veins 
(Fig. 1.30):
■	 Lymph from the right side of the head and neck, the 
right upper limb, and the right side of the thorax is 
carried by lymphatic vessels that connect with veins on 
the right side of the neck.
■	 Lymph from all other regions of the body is carried by 
lymphatic vessels that drain into veins on the left side of 
the neck.
Specific information about the organization of the 
lymphatic system in each region of the body is discussed in 
the appropriate chapter.
Fig. 1.29  Regions associated with clusters or a particular 
abundance of lymph nodes. 
Cervical nodes
(along course
of internal
jugular vein)
Axillary nodes
(in axilla)
Deep nodes
(related to aorta
and celiac trunk
and superior and
inferior mesenteric
arteries)
Pericranial ring
(base of head)
Tracheal nodes
(nodes related to
trachea and bronchi)
Inguinal nodes
(along course of
inguinal ligament)
Femoral nodes
(along femoral vein)
Fig. 1.30  Major lymphatic vessels that drain into large veins in 
the neck. 
Left jugular trunk
Left subclavian
trunk
Left broncho-
mediastinal trunk
Thoracic duct
Right jugular trunk
Right subclavian
trunk
Right 
broncho-
mediastinal
trunk

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
29
In the clinic
Lymph nodes
Lymph nodes are efficient filters and have an internal 
honeycomb of reticular connective tissue filled with 
lymphocytes. These lymphocytes act on bacteria, viruses, 
and other bodily cells to destroy them. Lymph nodes tend to 
drain specific areas, and if infection occurs within a drainage 
area, the lymph node will become active. The rapid cell 
turnover and production of local inflammatory mediators 
may cause the node to enlarge and become tender. 
Similarly, in patients with malignancy the lymphatics may 
drain metastasizing cells to the lymph nodes. These can 
become enlarged and inflamed and will need to be removed 
if clinically symptomatic.
Lymph nodes may become diffusely enlarged in certain 
systemic illnesses (e.g., viral infection), or local groups may 
become enlarged with primary lymph node malignancies, 
such as lymphoma (Fig. 1.31).
Fig. 1.31  A. This computed tomogram with contrast, in the axial plane, demonstrates the normal common carotid arteries and internal 
jugular veins with numerous other nonenhancing nodules that represent lymph nodes in a patient with lymphoma. B. This computed 
tomogram with contrast, in the axial plane, demonstrates a large anterior soft tissue mediastinal mass that represents a lymphoma. 
Lymph nodes
Thyroid gland
Left carotid artery
Left jugular vein
A
Anterior mediastinal mass
(lymphoma)
Superior vena cava
Ascending aorta
Thoracic aorta
B
NERVOUS SYSTEM
The nervous system can be separated into parts based on 
structure and on function:
■	 structurally, it can be divided into the central nervous 
system (CNS) and the peripheral nervous system (PNS) 
(Fig. 1.32);
■	 functionally, it can be divided into somatic and visceral 
parts.
The CNS is composed of the brain and spinal cord, both 
of which develop from the neural tube in the embryo.
The PNS is composed of all nervous structures outside 
the CNS that connect the CNS to the body. Elements of this 
system develop from neural crest cells and as outgrowths 
of the CNS. The PNS consists of the spinal and cranial 
nerves, visceral nerves and plexuses, and the enteric 
system. The detailed anatomy of a typical spinal nerve is 
described in Chapter 2, as is the way spinal nerves are 
numbered. Cranial nerves are described in Chapter 8. 
The details of nerve plexuses are described in chapters 
dealing with the specific regions in which the plexuses are 
located.
Central nervous system
Brain
The parts of the brain are the cerebral hemispheres, the 
cerebellum, and the brainstem. The cerebral hemispheres 

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
The Body
30
Fig. 1.32  CNS and PNS. 
Brain
Spinal
cord
Peripheral nervous
system (PNS)
Central nervous
system (CNS)
Cranial
nerve
Spinal
nerve
Spinal cord
The spinal cord is the part of the CNS in the superior two 
thirds of the vertebral canal. It is roughly cylindrical in 
shape, and is circular to oval in cross section with a central 
canal. A further discussion of the spinal cord can be found 
in Chapter 2.
Meninges
The meninges (Fig. 1.33) are three connective tissue cover­
ings that surround, protect, and suspend the brain and 
spinal cord within the cranial cavity and vertebral canal, 
respectively:
■	 The dura mater is the thickest and most external of the 
coverings.
■	 The arachnoid mater is against the internal surface of 
the dura mater.
■	 The pia mater is adherent to the brain and spinal cord.
Between the arachnoid and pia mater is the subarach­
noid space, which contains CSF.
A further discussion of the cranial meninges can 
be found in Chapter 8 and of the spinal meninges in 
Chapter 2.
Functional subdivisions of the CNS
Functionally, the nervous system can be divided into 
somatic and visceral parts.
consist of an outer portion, or the gray matter, contain­
ing cell bodies; an inner portion, or the white matter, 
made up of axons forming tracts or pathways; and the 
ventricles, which are spaces filled with CSF.
The cerebellum has two lateral lobes and a midline 
portion. The components of the brainstem are classi­
cally defined as the diencephalon, midbrain, pons, and 
medulla. However, in common usage today, the term 
“brainstem” usually refers to the midbrain, pons, and 
medulla.
A further discussion of the brain can be found in 
Chapter 8.
Fig. 1.33  Arrangement of meninges in the cranial cavity. 
Subarachnoid space
Pia mater
External table
Diploe
Internal table
Skull
Arachnoid mater
Cerebral artery
Diploic vein
Cerebral cortex
Meningeal layer
Endosteal layer
Cranial
dura
mater
Extradural space
(potential space)
Subdural space
(potential space)

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
31
■	 The somatic part (soma, from the Greek for “body”) 
innervates structures (skin and most skeletal muscle) 
derived from somites in the embryo, and is mainly 
involved with receiving and responding to information 
from the external environment.
■	 The visceral part (viscera, from the Greek for “guts”) 
innervates organ systems in the body and other visceral 
elements, such as smooth muscle and glands, in periph­
eral regions of the body. It is concerned mainly with 
detecting and responding to information from the 
internal environment.
Somatic part of the nervous system
The somatic part of the nervous system consists of:
■	 nerves that carry conscious sensations from peripheral 
regions back to the CNS, and
■	 nerves that innervate voluntary muscles.
Fig. 1.34  Differentiation of somites in a “tubular” embryo. 
Ectoderm
Epaxial muscles and dermis
Hypaxial muscles and dermis
Intermediate mesoderm
Endoderm
Lateral plate mesoderm
Body cavity
(coelom)
Somite
Neural crest
Neural tube
Notochord
Dermatomyotome
Somatic nerves arise segmentally along the developing 
CNS in association with somites, which are themselves 
arranged segmentally along each side of the neural tube 
(Fig. 1.34). Part of each somite (the dermatomyotome) 
gives rise to skeletal muscle and the dermis of the skin. As 
cells of the dermatomyotome differentiate, they migrate 
into posterior (dorsal) and anterior (ventral) areas of the 
developing body:
■	 Cells that migrate anteriorly give rise to muscles of the 
limbs and trunk (hypaxial muscles) and to the associ­
ated dermis.
■	 Cells that migrate posteriorly give rise to the intrinsic 
muscles of the back (epaxial muscles) and the associ­
ated dermis.
Developing nerve cells within anterior regions of the 
neural tube extend processes peripherally into posterior 

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
The Body
32
and anterior regions of the differentiating dermatomyo­
tome of each somite.
Simultaneously, derivatives of neural crest cells (cells 
derived from neural folds during formation of the neural 
tube) differentiate into neurons on each side of the neural 
tube and extend processes both medially and laterally 
(Fig. 1.35):
■	 Medial processes pass into the posterior aspect of the 
neural tube.
■	 Lateral processes pass into the differentiating regions of 
the adjacent dermatomyotome.
Neurons that develop from cells within the spinal cord 
are motor neurons and those that develop from neural 
crest cells are sensory neurons.
Somatic sensory and somatic motor fibers that are 
organized segmentally along the neural tube become parts 
of all spinal nerves and some cranial nerves.
The clusters of sensory nerve cell bodies derived from 
neural crest cells and located outside the CNS form sensory 
ganglia.
Fig. 1.35  Somatic sensory and motor neurons. Blue lines indicate motor nerves and red lines indicate sensory nerves. 
Somatic sensory neuron
developing from neural crest cells
Epaxial (back) muscles
Hypaxial muscles
Axon of motor neuron
projects to muscle developing
from dermatomyotome
Somatic motor neuron
cell body in anterior region
of neural tube
Generally, all sensory information passes into the poste­
rior aspect of the spinal cord, and all motor fibers leave 
anteriorly.
Somatic sensory neurons carry information from the 
periphery into the CNS and are also called somatic 
sensory afferents or general somatic afferents 
(GSAs). The modalities carried by these nerves include 
temperature, pain, touch, and proprioception. Propriocep­
tion is the sense of determining the position and movement 
of the musculoskeletal system detected by special receptors 
in muscles and tendons.
Somatic motor fibers carry information away from the 
CNS to skeletal muscles and are also called somatic motor 
efferents or general somatic efferents (GSEs). Like 
somatic sensory fibers that come from the periphery, somatic 
motor fibers can be very long. They extend from cell bodies 
in the spinal cord to the muscle cells they innervate.
Dermatomes
Because cells from a specific somite develop into the dermis 
of the skin in a precise location, somatic sensory fibers 
originally associated with that somite enter the posterior 

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
33
Fig. 1.36  Dermatomes. 
C6 segment of spinal cord
Spinal ganglion
Dermatomyotome
Autonomous region
(where overlap of
dermatomes is
least likely)
of C6 dermatome
(pad of thumb)
Skin on the lateral side of the forearm and on the
thumb is innervated by C6 spinal level (spinal nerve).
The dermis of the skin in this region develops from the somite
initially associated with the C6 level of the developing spinal cord
Caudal
Cranial
Somite
region of the spinal cord at a specific level and become 
part of one specific spinal nerve (Fig. 1.36). Each spinal 
nerve therefore carries somatic sensory information from 
a specific area of skin on the surface of the body. A der­
matome is that area of skin supplied by a single spinal 
cord level, or on one side, by a single spinal nerve.
There is overlap in the distribution of dermatomes, but 
usually a specific region within each dermatome can be 
identified as an area supplied by a single spinal cord level. 
Testing touch in these autonomous zones in a conscious 
patient can be used to localize lesions to a specific spinal 
nerve or to a specific level in the spinal cord.
Myotomes
Somatic motor nerves that were originally associated with 
a specific somite emerge from the anterior region of the 
spinal cord and, together with sensory nerves from the 
same level, become part of one spinal nerve. Therefore 
each spinal nerve carries somatic motor fibers to muscles 
that originally developed from the related somite. A 
myotome is that portion of a skeletal muscle innervated 
by a single spinal cord level or, on one side, by a single 
spinal nerve.

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
The Body
34
Fig. 1.37  Myotomes. 
C6 segment of spinal cord
Muscles that abduct the arm are innervated by C5 and C6 
spinal levels (spinal nerves) and develop from somites 
initially associated with C5 and C6 regions of developing 
spinal cord
C5 segment of spinal cord
Dermatomyotome
Somite
Myotomes are generally more difficult to test than der­
matomes because each skeletal muscle in the body often 
develops from more than one somite and is therefore 
innervated by nerves derived from more than one spinal 
cord level (Fig. 1.37).
Testing movements at successive joints can help in local­
izing lesions to specific nerves or to a specific spinal cord 
level. For example:
■	 Muscles that move the shoulder joint are innervated 
mainly by spinal nerves from spinal cord levels C5 
and C6.
■	 Muscles that move the elbow are innervated mainly by 
spinal nerves from spinal cord levels C6 and C7.
■	 Muscles in the hand are innervated mainly by spinal 
nerves from spinal cord levels C8 and T1.
Visceral part of the nervous system
The visceral part of the nervous system, as in the somatic 
part, consists of motor and sensory components:
■	 Sensory nerves monitor changes in the viscera.
■	 Motor nerves mainly innervate smooth muscle, cardiac 
muscle, and glands.
The visceral motor component is commonly referred to 
as the autonomic division of  the PNS and is subdivided 
into sympathetic and parasympathetic parts.

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
35
In the clinic
Dermatomes and myotomes
A knowledge of dermatomes and myotomes is absolutely 
fundamental to carrying out a neurological examination. A 
typical dermatome map is shown in Fig. 1.38.
Clinically, a dermatome is that area of skin supplied by a 
single spinal nerve or spinal cord level. A myotome is that 
region of skeletal muscle innervated by a single spinal nerve 
or spinal cord level. Most individual muscles of the body are 
innervated by more than one spinal cord level, so the 
evaluation of myotomes is usually accomplished by testing 
movements of joints or muscle groups.
Fig. 1.38  Dermatomes. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. 
L1
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
T2
T1
C8
C7
C6
C5
C4
C3
C2
L4
L5
S1
L3
L2
[V1]
V1
[V2]
[V3]
Cranial nerve [V]
(Trigeminal nerve)
L1
T12
T11
T10
T9
T8
T7
T6
T5
T4
T3
T2
T2
T1
C8
C7
C6
C5
C4
C3
C2
L4
L4
L5
L5
S1
S4
S2
S3
L3
L3
L2
A
B

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
The Body
36
Fig. 1.39  Development of the visceral part of the nervous system. 
Motor nerve ending
associated with
blood vessels,
sweat glands,
arrector pili muscles
at periphery
Part of neural crest developing
into spinal ganglia
Visceral motor ganglion
Motor nerve ending associated with viscera
Developing gastrointestinal tract
Sensory nerve ending
Body cavity
(coelom)
Visceral sensory neuron develops
from neural crest and becomes
part of spinal ganglion
Visceral motor
preganglionic
neuron in lateral
region of CNS
(spinal cord)
Postganglionic motor neuron is outside CNS.
An aggregation of postganglionic neuronal cell
bodies forms a peripheral visceral motor ganglion.
Like the somatic part of the nervous system, the visceral 
part is segmentally arranged and develops in a parallel 
fashion (Fig. 1.39).
Visceral sensory neurons that arise from neural crest 
cells send processes medially into the adjacent neural tube 
and laterally into regions associated with the developing 
body. These sensory neurons and their processes, referred 
to as general visceral afferent fibers (GVAs), are associ­
ated primarily with chemoreception, mechanoreception, 
and stretch reception.
Visceral motor neurons that arise from cells in lateral 
regions of the neural tube send processes out of the ante­
rior aspect of the tube. Unlike in the somatic part, these 
processes, containing general visceral efferent fibers 
(GVEs), synapse with other cells, usually other visceral 
motor neurons, that develop outside the CNS from neural 
crest cells that migrate away from their original positions 
close to the developing neural tube.
The visceral motor neurons located in the spinal cord are 
referred to as preganglionic motor neurons and their axons 
are called preganglionic fibers; the visceral motor neurons 
located outside the CNS are referred to as postganglionic motor 
neurons and their axons are called postganglionic fibers.
The cell bodies of the visceral motor neurons outside the 
CNS often associate with each other in a discrete mass 
called a ganglion.

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
37
■	 The sympathetic system innervates structures in 
peripheral regions of the body and viscera.
■	 The parasympathetic system is more restricted to inner­
vation of the viscera only.
Terminology
Spinal sympathetic and spinal parasympathetic neurons 
share certain developmental and phenotypic features 
that are different from those of cranial parasympathetic 
neurons. Based on this, some researchers have suggested 
reclassifying all spinal visceral motor neurons as sympa­
thetic (Espinosa-Medina I et al. Science 2016;354:893-
897). Others are against reclassification, arguing that the 
results only indicate that the neurons are spinal in origin 
Visceral sensory and motor fibers enter and leave the 
CNS with their somatic equivalents (Fig. 1.40). Visceral 
sensory fibers enter the spinal cord together with somatic 
sensory fibers through posterior roots of spinal nerves. 
Preganglionic fibers of visceral motor neurons exit the 
spinal cord in the anterior roots of spinal nerves, along 
with fibers from somatic motor neurons.
Postganglionic fibers traveling to visceral elements in 
the periphery are found in the posterior and anterior rami 
(branches) of spinal nerves.
Visceral motor and sensory fibers that travel to and from 
viscera form named visceral branches that are separate 
from the somatic branches. These nerves generally form 
plexuses from which arise branches to the viscera.
Visceral motor and sensory fibers do not enter and leave 
the CNS at all levels (Fig. 1.41):
■	 In the cranial region, visceral components are associ­
ated with four of the twelve cranial nerves (CN III, VII, 
IX, and X).
■	 In the spinal cord, visceral components are associated 
mainly with spinal cord levels T1 to L2 and S2 to S4.
Visceral motor components associated with spinal levels 
T1 to L2 are termed sympathetic. Those visceral motor 
components in cranial and sacral regions, on either side of 
the sympathetic region, are termed parasympathetic:
Fig. 1.40  Basic anatomy of a thoracic spinal nerve. 
Somatic sensory and
visceral sensory fibers
Somatic motor and
visceral motor fibers
Posterior root
(sensory)
Posterior
ramus
Spinal
ganglion
Spinal
nerve
Anterior
ramus
Anterior root (motor)
Fig. 1.41  Parts of the CNS associated with visceral motor 
components. 
Sympathetic
T1 to L2
spinal segments
Brainstem
cranial nerves
III, VII, IX, X
S2 to S4
spinal segments
Parasympathetic

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
The Body
38
(Neuhuber W et al. Anat Rec 2017;300:1369-1370). In 
addition, sacral nerves do not enter the sympathetic trunk, 
nor do they have postganglionic fibers that travel to the 
periphery on spinal nerves, as do T1-L2 visceral motor 
fibers. We have chosen to retain the classification of S2,3,4 
visceral motor neurons as parasympathetic. “Parasympa­
thetic” simply means on either side of the “sympathetic,” 
which correctly describes their anatomy.
Fig. 1.42  Sympathetic part of the autonomic division of the PNS. 
Abdominal viscera
Heart
Organs
Peripheral
Sympathetic nerves follow
somatic nerves to periphery
(glands, smooth muscle)
Pelvic viscera
Ganglion impar
Esophageal  plexus
Prevertebral plexus
Sympathetic system
The sympathetic part of the autonomic division of the PNS 
leaves thoracolumbar regions of the spinal cord with 
the somatic components of spinal nerves T1 to L2 (Fig. 
1.42). On each side, a paravertebral sympathetic trunk 
extends from the base of the skull to the inferior end of the 
vertebral column where the two trunks converge anteriorly 
to the coccyx at the ganglion impar. Each trunk is attached 

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
39
to the anterior rami of spinal nerves and becomes the route 
by which sympathetics are distributed to the periphery and 
all viscera.
Visceral motor preganglionic fibers leave the T1 to L2 
part of the spinal cord in anterior roots. The fibers then 
enter the spinal nerves, pass through the anterior rami and 
into the sympathetic trunks. One trunk is located on each 
side of the vertebral column (paravertebral) and positioned 
anterior to the anterior rami. Along the trunk is a series of 
segmentally arranged ganglia formed from collections of 
postganglionic neuronal cell bodies where the pregangli­
onic neurons synapse with postganglionic neurons. Ante­
rior rami of T1 to L2 are connected to the sympathetic 
trunk or to a ganglion by a white ramus communicans, 
which carries preganglionic sympathetic fibers and appears 
white because the fibers it contains are myelinated.
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers that enter a paraverte­
bral ganglion or the sympathetic trunk through a white 
Fig. 1.43  Course of sympathetic fibers that travel to the periphery in the same spinal nerves in which they travel out of the spinal cord. 
Gray ramus communicans
T10 spinal nerve
Posterior
ramus
Anterior
ramus
Peripheral distribution of sympathetics
carried peripherally by terminal cutaneous
branches of spinal nerve T1 to L2
Motor nerve to sweat glands,
smooth muscle of blood
vessels, and arrector pili
muscles in the part of T10
dermatome supplied by the
anterior ramus
T10 spinal segment
White ramus communicans
ramus communicans may take the following four pathways 
to target tissues:
1.  Peripheral sympathetic innervation at the level 
of origin of the preganglionic fiber
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers may synapse with post­
ganglionic motor neurons in ganglia associated with the 
sympathetic trunk, after which postganglionic fibers enter 
the same anterior ramus and are distributed with periph­
eral branches of the posterior and anterior rami of that 
spinal nerve (Fig. 1.43). The fibers innervate structures at 
the periphery of the body in regions supplied by the spinal 
nerve. The gray ramus communicans connects the 
sympathetic trunk or a ganglion to the anterior ramus and 
contains the postganglionic sympathetic fibers. It appears 
gray because postganglionic fibers are nonmyelinated. The 
gray ramus communicans is positioned medial to the white 
ramus communicans.

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
The Body
40
Fig. 1.44  Course of sympathetic nerves that travel to the periphery in spinal nerves that are not the ones through which they left the spinal 
cord. 
Sympathetic paravertebral trunks
Peripheral distribution of
ascending sympathetics
Peripheral distribution of
descending sympathetics
(C1) C2 to C8
T1 to L2
L3 to Co
White ramus communicans
Gray ramus communicans
Posterior root
Gray ramus communicans
Gray ramus communicans
Anterior root
2.  Peripheral sympathetic innervation above or 
below the level of origin of the preganglionic fiber
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers may ascend or descend to 
other vertebral levels where they synapse in ganglia associ­
ated with spinal nerves that may or may not have visceral 
motor input directly from the spinal cord (i.e., those nerves 
other than T1 to L2) (Fig. 1.44).
The postganglionic fibers leave the distant ganglia via 
gray rami communicantes and are distributed along the 
posterior and anterior rami of the spinal nerves.
The ascending and descending fibers, together with all 
the ganglia, form the paravertebral sympathetic trunk, 
which extends the entire length of the vertebral column. 
The formation of this trunk, on each side, enables visceral 
motor fibers of the sympathetic part of the autonomic 
division of the PNS, which ultimately emerge from only a 
small region of the spinal cord (T1 to L2), to be distributed 
to peripheral regions innervated by all spinal nerves.
White rami communicantes only occur in association 
with spinal nerves T1 to L2, whereas gray rami communi­
cantes are associated with all spinal nerves.
Fibers from spinal cord levels T1 to T5 pass predomi­
nantly superiorly, whereas fibers from T5 to L2 pass inferi­
orly. All sympathetics passing into the head have 
preganglionic fibers that emerge from spinal cord level 
T1 and ascend in the sympathetic trunks to the highest 
ganglion in the neck (the superior cervical ganglion), 
where they synapse. Postganglionic fibers then travel along 
blood vessels to target tissues in the head, including blood 
vessels, sweat glands, small smooth muscles associated 
with the upper eyelids, and the dilator of the pupil.

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
41
Fig. 1.45  Course of sympathetic nerves traveling to the heart. 
Sympathetic cardiac nerves
Sympathetic cardiac nerves
Sympathetic trunk
Cardiac plexus
T1 to T4
Cervical
White ramus
communicans
Gray ramus
communicans
3.  Sympathetic innervation of thoracic 
and cervical viscera
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers may synapse with post­
ganglionic motor neurons in ganglia and then leave the 
ganglia medially to innervate thoracic or cervical viscera 
(Fig. 1.45). They may ascend in the trunk before synaps­
ing, and after synapsing the postganglionic fibers may 
combine with those from other levels to form named vis­
ceral nerves, such as cardiac nerves. Often, these nerves 
join branches from the parasympathetic system to form 
plexuses on or near the surface of the target organ, for 
example, the cardiac and pulmonary plexuses. Branches 
of the plexus innervate the organ. Spinal cord levels T1 
to T5 mainly innervate cranial, cervical, and thoracic 
viscera.

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
The Body
42
Fig. 1.46  Course of sympathetic nerves traveling to abdominal and pelvic viscera. 
White ramus 
communicans
Gray ramus 
communicans
Sacral splanchnic nerves
Lumbar splanchnic nerves
Least splanchnic nerves
Lesser splanchnic nerves
Greater splanchnic nerves
Prevertebral plexus
and ganglia
Paravertebral
sympathetic trunk
Abdominal
and
pelvic viscera
Aorta
T5 to T9
T12
T9 to T10
(T10 to T11)
L1 to L2
4.  Sympathetic innervation of the abdomen and pelvic 
regions and the adrenals
Preganglionic sympathetic fibers may pass through the 
sympathetic trunk and paravertebral ganglia without 
synapsing and, together with similar fibers from other 
levels, form splanchnic nerves (greater, lesser, least, 
lumbar, and sacral), which pass into the abdomen and 
pelvic regions (Fig. 1.46). The preganglionic fibers in these 
nerves are derived from spinal cord levels T5 to L2.
The splanchnic nerves generally connect with sympa­
thetic ganglia around the roots of major arteries that 
branch from the abdominal aorta. These ganglia are part 
of a large prevertebral plexus that also has input from the 

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
43
Fig. 1.47  Parasympathetic part of the autonomic division of the PNS. 
Thoracic visceral  plexus
Prevertebral plexus
Abdominal viscera
Synapse with nerve cells
of enteric system
Erectile tissues of penis
and clitoris
S2 to S4
Sacral parasympathetic
outflow via pelvic
splanchnic nerves
Cranial parasympathetic
outflow via cranial nerves
Heart
Submandibular
ganglion
Pterygopalatine
ganglion
Otic ganglion
Ciliary ganglion
[III]
[VII]
[IX]
[X]
Pelvic viscera
Pupillary constriction
Transition from supply by [X]
to pelvic splanchnic nerves
Salivary glands
Lacrimal gland
Parotid gland
parasympathetic part of the autonomic division of the 
PNS. Postganglionic sympathetic fibers are distributed in 
extensions of this plexus, predominantly along arteries, to 
viscera in the abdomen and pelvis.
Some of the preganglionic fibers in the prevertebral 
plexus do not synapse in the sympathetic ganglia of the 
plexus but pass through the system to the adrenal gland, 
where they synapse directly with cells of the adrenal 
medulla. These cells are homologues of sympathetic post­
ganglionic neurons and secrete adrenaline and noradrena­
line into the vascular system.
Parasympathetic system
The parasympathetic part of the autonomic division of the 
PNS (Fig. 1.47) leaves cranial and sacral regions of the 
CNS in association with:

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
The Body
44
■	 cranial nerves III, VII, IX, and X: III, VII, and IX 
carry parasympathetic fibers to structures within 
the head and neck only, whereas X (the vagus 
nerve) also innervates thoracic and most abdominal 
viscera; and
■	 spinal nerves S2 to S4: sacral parasympathetic fibers 
innervate inferior abdominal viscera, pelvic viscera, and 
the arteries associated with erectile tissues of the 
perineum.
Like the visceral motor nerves of the sympathetic part, 
the visceral motor nerves of the parasympathetic part 
generally have two neurons in the pathway. The pregangli­
onic neurons are in the CNS, and fibers leave in the cranial 
nerves.
Sacral preganglionic parasympathetic fibers
In the sacral region, the preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers form special visceral nerves (the pelvic splanchnic 
nerves), which originate from the anterior rami of S2 to 
S4 and enter pelvic extensions of the large prevertebral 
plexus formed around the abdominal aorta. These fibers 
are distributed to pelvic and abdominal viscera mainly 
along blood vessels. The postganglionic motor neurons are 
in the walls of the viscera. In organs of the gastrointestinal 
system, preganglionic fibers do not have a postganglionic 
parasympathetic motor neuron in the pathway; instead, 
preganglionic fibers synapse directly on neurons in the 
ganglia of the enteric system.
Cranial nerve preganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers
The preganglionic parasympathetic motor fibers in CN 
III, VII, and IX separate from the nerves and connect 
with one of four distinct ganglia, which house postgangli­
onic motor neurons. These four ganglia are near major 
branches of CN V. Postganglionic fibers leave the ganglia, 
join the branches of CN V, and are carried to target tissues 
(salivary, mucous, and lacrimal glands; constrictor muscle 
of the pupil; and ciliary muscle in the eye) with these 
branches.
The vagus nerve [X] gives rise to visceral branches along 
its course. These branches contribute to plexuses associ­
ated with thoracic viscera or to the large prevertebral 
plexus in the abdomen and pelvis. Many of these plexuses 
also contain sympathetic fibers.
When present, postganglionic parasympathetic neurons 
are in the walls of the target viscera.
Visceral sensory innervation (visceral afferents)
Visceral sensory fibers generally accompany visceral 
motor fibers.
Visceral sensory fibers accompany 
sympathetic fibers
Visceral sensory fibers follow the course of sympathetic 
fibers entering the spinal cord at similar spinal cord levels. 
However, visceral sensory fibers may also enter the spinal 
cord at levels other than those associated with motor 
output. For example, visceral sensory fibers from the heart 
may enter at levels higher than spinal cord level T1. Vis­
ceral sensory fibers that accompany sympathetic fibers are 
mainly concerned with detecting pain.
Visceral sensory fibers accompany 
parasympathetic fibers
Visceral sensory fibers accompanying parasympathetic 
fibers are carried mainly in IX and X and in spinal nerves 
S2 to S4.
Visceral sensory fibers in IX carry information from 
chemoreceptors and baroreceptors associated with the 
walls of major arteries in the neck, and from receptors in 
the pharynx.
Visceral sensory fibers in X include those from cervical 
viscera, and major vessels and viscera in the thorax and 
abdomen.
Visceral sensory fibers from pelvic viscera and the distal 
parts of the colon are carried in S2 to S4.
Visceral sensory fibers associated with parasympathetic 
fibers primarily relay information to the CNS about the 
status of normal physiological processes and reflex 
activities.

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
Body Systems  •  Nervous System
1
45
Fig. 1.48  Enteric part of the nervous system. 
Circular muscle layer
Submucous plexus
Submucosa
Submucosa muscle
Myenteric plexus
Longitudinal muscle layer
Peritoneum
Enteric nervous system
Mesentery
Preganglionic
parasympathetic
Visceral afferent
Vagal afferent
Postganglionic
sympathetic
Preganglionic
sympathetic
Prevertebral
sympathetic ganglion
Blood vessel
The enteric system
The enteric nervous system consists of motor and sensory 
neurons and their support cells, which form two intercon­
nected plexuses, the myenteric and submucous nerve 
plexuses, within the walls of the gastrointestinal tract 
(Fig. 1.48). Each of these plexuses is formed by:
■	 ganglia, which house the nerve cell bodies and associ­
ated cells, and
■	 bundles of nerve fibers, which pass between ganglia and 
from the ganglia into surrounding tissues.
Neurons in the enteric system are derived from neural 
crest cells originally associated with occipitocervical and 
sacral regions. Interestingly, more neurons are reported to 
be in the enteric system than in the spinal cord itself.
Sensory and motor neurons within the enteric system 
control reflex activity within and between parts of the 

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
The Body
46
gastrointestinal system. These reflexes regulate peristalsis, 
secretomotor activity, and vascular tone. These activities 
can occur independently of the brain and spinal cord, but 
can also be modified by input from preganglionic parasym­
pathetic and postganglionic sympathetic fibers.
Sensory information from the enteric system is carried 
back to the CNS by visceral sensory fibers.
Nerve plexuses
Nerve plexuses are either somatic or visceral and combine 
fibers from different sources or levels to form new nerves 
with specific targets or destinations (Fig. 1.49). Plexuses of 
the enteric system also generate reflex activity independent 
of the CNS.
Somatic plexuses
Major somatic plexuses formed from the anterior rami of 
spinal nerves are the cervical (C1 to C4), brachial (C5 to 
T1), lumbar (L1 to L4), sacral (L4 to S4), and coccygeal (S5 
to Co) plexuses. Except for spinal nerve T1, the anterior 
rami of thoracic spinal nerves remain independent and do 
not participate in plexuses.
Visceral plexuses
Visceral nerve plexuses are formed in association with 
viscera and generally contain efferent (sympathetic and 
parasympathetic) and afferent components (Fig. 1.49). 
These plexuses include cardiac and pulmonary plexuses in 
the thorax and a large prevertebral plexus in the abdomen 
anterior to the aorta, which extends inferiorly onto the 
lateral walls of the pelvis. The massive prevertebral plexus 
supplies input to and receives output from all abdominal 
and pelvic viscera.
In the clinic
Referred pain
Referred pain occurs when sensory information comes to 
the spinal cord from one location but is interpreted by the 
CNS as coming from another location innervated by the 
same spinal cord level. Usually, this happens when the 
pain information comes from a region, such as the gut, 
which has a low amount of sensory output. These 
afferents converge on neurons at the same spinal cord 
level that receive information from the skin, which is an 
area with a high amount of sensory output. As a result, 
pain from the normally low output region is interpreted as 
coming from the normally high output region.
Pain is most often referred from a region innervated by 
the visceral part of the nervous system to a region 
innervated, at the same spinal cord level, by the somatic 
side of the nervous system.
Pain can also be referred from one somatic region 
to another. For example, irritation of the peritoneum 
on the inferior surface of the diaphragm, which is 
innervated by the phrenic nerve, can be referred to 
the skin on the top of the shoulder, which is innervated 
by other somatic nerves arising at the same spinal 
cord level.
OTHER SYSTEMS
Specific information about the organization and compo­
nents of the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and urogenital 
systems will be discussed in each of the succeeding chapters 
of this text.

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
1
47
Body Systems  •  Other Systems
Fig. 1.49  Nerve plexuses. 
C7
C6
C5
C4
C3
C2
C1
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
L2
L3
L4
L5
C8
Greater
Least
Lesser
SOMATIC PLEXUSES
VISCERAL PLEXUSES
Cervical plexus
anterior rami C1 to C4
Brachial plexus
anterior rami C5 to T1
Lumbar plexus
anterior rami L1 to L4
Sacral plexus
anterior rami
L4 to S4
Parasympathetic [X]
S2 to S4 pelvic splanchnic nerves
(parasympathetic)
Pulmonary branch
Pulmonary branches
Cardiac branches
Cardiac plexus
Thoracic aortic plexus
Esophageal plexus
Prevertebral plexus
Vagal trunk
Ganglion impar
Sacral splanchnic nerves
Splanchnic
nerves
Lumbar splanchnic
nerves

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
The Body
48
Case 1
APPENDICITIS
A young man sought medical care because of central 
abdominal pain that was diffuse and colicky. After some 
hours, the pain began to localize in the right iliac fossa and 
became constant. He was referred to an abdominal 
surgeon, who removed a grossly inflamed appendix. The 
patient made an uneventful recovery.
When the appendix becomes inflamed, the visceral sensory 
fibers are stimulated. These fibers enter the spinal cord with 
the sympathetic fibers at spinal cord level T10. The pain is 
referred to the dermatome of T10, which is in the umbilical 
region (Fig. 1.50). The pain is diffuse, not focal; every time a 
peristaltic wave passes through the ileocecal region, the pain 
recurs. This intermittent type of pain is referred to as colic.
In the later stages of the disease, the appendix contacts and 
irritates the parietal peritoneum in the right iliac fossa, which 
is innervated by somatic sensory nerves. This produces a 
constant focal pain, which predominates over the colicky 
pain that the patient felt some hours previously. The patient 
no longer interprets the referred pain from the T10 
dermatome.
Although this is a typical history for appendicitis, it should 
always be borne in mind that the patient’s symptoms and 
signs may vary. The appendix is situated in a retrocecal 
position in approximately 70% of patients; therefore it may 
never contact the parietal peritoneum anteriorly in the right 
iliac fossa. It is also possible that the appendix is long and 
may directly contact other structures. As a consequence, the 
patient may have other symptoms (e.g., the appendix may 
contact the ureter, and the patient may then develop 
urological symptoms).
Although appendicitis is common, other disorders, for 
example of the bowel and pelvis, may produce similar 
symptoms.
Fig. 1.50  Mechanism for referred pain from an inflamed 
appendix to the T10 dermatome. 
Pain interpreted as
originating in distribution
of somatic sensory nerves
Patient perceives
diffuse pain in
T10 dermatome
Appendix
Visceral
sensory nerve
Somatic
sensory
nerve
Clinical cases

