=== PAGE 52 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  General Description
2
51
Fig. 2.1  Skeletal framework of the back. 
Skull
Vertebra
Scapula
Vertebral column
Pelvic bone
Conceptual overview
GENERAL DESCRIPTION
The back consists of the posterior aspect of the body and 
provides the musculoskeletal axis of support for the trunk. 
Bony elements consist mainly of the vertebrae, although 
proximal elements of the ribs, superior aspects of the pelvic 
bones, and posterior basal regions of the skull contribute 
to the back’s skeletal framework (Fig. 2.1).
Associated muscles interconnect the vertebrae and ribs 
with each other and with the pelvis and skull. The back 
contains the spinal cord and proximal parts of the spinal 
nerves, which send and receive information to and from 
most of the body.

=== PAGE 53 ===
Back
52
Fig. 2.2  Curvatures of the vertebral column. 
Cervical curvature
(secondary curvature)
Thoracic curvature
(primary curvature)
Lumbar curvature
(secondary curvature)
Sacral/coccygeal curvature
(primary curvature)
Gravity line
Concave primary
curvature of back
Early embryo
Adult
Somites
FUNCTIONS
Support
The skeletal and muscular elements of the back 
support the body’s weight, transmit forces through the 
pelvis to the lower limbs, carry and position the head, 
and brace and help maneuver the upper limbs. The verte­
bral column is positioned posteriorly in the body at the 
midline. When viewed laterally, it has a number of curva­
tures (Fig. 2.2):
■	 The primary curvature of the vertebral column is 
concave anteriorly, reflecting the original shape of the 
embryo, and is retained in the thoracic and sacral 
regions in adults.
■	 Secondary curvatures, which are concave posteriorly, 
form in the cervical and lumbar regions and bring the 
center of gravity into a vertical line, which allows the 
body’s weight to be balanced on the vertebral column in 
a way that expends the least amount of muscular energy 
to maintain an upright bipedal stance.
As stresses on the back increase from the cervical to 
lumbar regions, lower back problems are common.
Movement
Muscles of the back consist of extrinsic and intrinsic 
groups:
■	 The extrinsic muscles of the back move the upper limbs 
and the ribs.
■	 The intrinsic muscles of the back maintain posture and 
move the vertebral column; these movements include 
flexion (anterior bending), extension, lateral flexion, 
and rotation (Fig. 2.3).
Although the amount of movement between any two 
vertebrae is limited, the effects between vertebrae are addi­
tive along the length of the vertebral column. Also, freedom 
of movement and extension are limited in the thoracic 
region relative to the lumbar part of the vertebral column. 
Muscles in more anterior regions flex the vertebral column.

=== PAGE 54 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Functions
2
53
In the cervical region, the first two vertebrae and associ­
ated muscles are specifically modified to support and posi­
tion the head. The head flexes and extends, in the nodding 
motion, on vertebra CI, and rotation of the head occurs as 
vertebra CI moves on vertebra CII (Fig. 2.3).
Protection of the nervous system
The vertebral column and associated soft tissues of the 
back contain the spinal cord and proximal parts of the 
spinal nerves (Fig. 2.4). The more distal parts of the spinal 
nerves pass into all other regions of the body, including 
certain regions of the head.
Fig. 2.3  Back movements. 
Rotation
Lateral flexion
Flexion
Extension
Fig. 2.4  Nervous system. 
Brain
Cranial nerve
Spinal cord
Spinal nerve

=== PAGE 55 ===
Back
54
Fig. 2.5  Vertebrae. 
7 cervical vertebrae (CI–CVII)
12 thoracic vertebrae (TI–TXII)
5 lumbar vertebrae (LI–LV)
Sacrum
(5 fused sacral vertebrae I-V)
Coccyx
(3–4 fused coccygeal vertebrae I-IV)
COMPONENT PARTS
Bones
The major bones of the back are the 33 vertebrae (Fig. 
2.5). The number and specific characteristics of the verte­
brae vary depending on the body region with which they 
are associated. There are seven cervical, twelve thoracic, 
five lumbar, five sacral, and three to four coccygeal verte­
brae. The sacral vertebrae fuse into a single bony element, 
the sacrum. The coccygeal vertebrae are rudimentary in 
structure, vary in number from three to four, and often fuse 
into a single coccyx.

=== PAGE 56 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
2
55
On each side of the vertebral arch, a transverse process 
extends laterally from the region where a lamina meets a 
pedicle. From the same region, a superior articular process 
and an inferior articular process articulate with similar 
processes on adjacent vertebrae.
Each vertebra also contains rib elements. In the thorax, 
these costal elements are large and form ribs, which articu­
late with the vertebral bodies and transverse processes. 
In all other regions, these rib elements are small and are 
incorporated into the transverse processes. Occasionally, 
they develop into ribs in regions other than the thorax, 
usually in the lower cervical and upper lumbar regions.
Muscles
Muscles in the back can be classified as extrinsic or intrinsic 
based on their embryological origin and type of innerva­
tion (Fig. 2.7).
The extrinsic muscles are involved with movements of 
the upper limbs and thoracic wall and, in general, are 
innervated by anterior rami of spinal nerves. The superfi­
cial group of these muscles is related to the upper limbs, 
while the intermediate layer of muscles is associated with 
the thoracic wall.
All of the intrinsic muscles of the back are deep in 
position and are innervated by the posterior rami of 
spinal nerves. They support and move the vertebral 
column and participate in moving the head. One group 
of intrinsic muscles also moves the ribs relative to the 
vertebral column.
Typical vertebra
A typical vertebra consists of a vertebral body and a verte­
bral arch (Fig. 2.6).
The vertebral body is anterior and is the major weight­
bearing component of the bone. It increases in size 
from vertebra CII to vertebra LV. Fibrocartilaginous inter­
vertebral discs separate the vertebral bodies of adjacent 
vertebrae.
The vertebral arch is firmly anchored to the posterior 
surface of the vertebral body by two pedicles, which form 
the lateral pillars of the vertebral arch. The roof of the 
vertebral arch is formed by right and left laminae, which 
fuse at the midline.
The vertebral arches of the vertebrae are aligned to 
form the lateral and posterior walls of the vertebral canal, 
which extends from the first cervical vertebra (CI) to the 
last sacral vertebra (vertebra SV). This bony canal contains 
the spinal cord and its protective membranes, together 
with blood vessels, connective tissue, fat, and proximal 
parts of spinal nerves.
The vertebral arch of a typical vertebra has a number 
of characteristic projections, which serve as:
■	 attachments for muscles and ligaments,
■	 levers for the action of muscles, and
■	 sites of articulation with adjacent vertebrae.
A spinous process projects posteriorly and generally 
inferiorly from the roof of the vertebral arch.
Fig. 2.6  A typical vertebra. A. Superior view. B. Lateral view. 
Vertebral
body
Superior articular process
Inferior articular
process
Inferior vertebral notch
Superior vertebral
notch
Spinous process
Transverse process
Lamina
Pedicle
Pedicle
Transverse
process
Lamina
Spinous process
Vertebral body
Vertebral
arch
A
B
Fused costal
(rib) element
Anterior
Inferior
Superior
Posterior
Posterior
Anterior

=== PAGE 57 ===
Back
56
Fig. 2.7  Back muscles. A. Extrinsic muscles. B. Intrinsic muscles. 
Deep group
Serratus posterior
inferior
Serratus posterior
superior
Suboccipital
Levator scapulae
Splenius
Rhomboid minor
Superficial group
A
B
Intermediate group
Intrinsic muscles
True back muscles innervated by posterior rami of spinal nerves
Rhomboid major
Spinalis
Iliocostalis
Erector spinae
Longissimus
Latissimus
dorsi
Trapezius
Extrinsic muscles
Innervated by anterior rami of spinal nerves or cranial nerve XI (trapezius)

=== PAGE 58 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
2
57
■	 The pia mater is the innermost membrane and is 
intimately associated with the surface of the 
spinal cord.
■	 The second membrane, the arachnoid mater, is sepa­
rated from the pia by the subarachnoid space, which 
contains cerebrospinal fluid.
■	 The thickest and most external of the membranes, the 
dura mater, lies directly against, but is not attached to, 
the arachnoid mater.
In the vertebral canal, the dura mater is separated 
from surrounding bone by an extradural (epidural) space 
containing loose connective tissue, fat, and a venous 
plexus.
Vertebral canal
The spinal cord lies within a bony canal formed by adjacent 
vertebrae and soft tissue elements (the vertebral canal) 
(Fig. 2.8):
■	 The anterior wall is formed by the vertebral bodies 
of the vertebrae, intervertebral discs, and associated 
ligaments.
■	 The lateral walls and roof are formed by the vertebral 
arches and ligaments.
Within the vertebral canal, the spinal cord is surrounded 
by a series of three connective tissue membranes (the 
meninges):
Fig. 2.8  Vertebral canal. 
Spinal cord
Pia mater
Subarachnoid space
Dura mater
Arachnoid mater
Anterior ramus
Posterior ramus
Position of spinal ganglion
Transverse
process
Spinous
process
Posterior longitudinal
ligament
Anterior internal vertebral
venous plexus
Intervertebral disc
Extradural space
Extradural fat
Vertebral body

=== PAGE 59 ===
Back
58
■	 a posterior ramus—collectively, the small posterior rami 
innervate the back; and
■	 an anterior ramus—the much larger anterior rami 
innervate most other regions of the body except the 
head, which is innervated predominantly, but not exclu­
sively, by cranial nerves.
The anterior rami form the major somatic plexuses 
(cervical, brachial, lumbar, and sacral) of the body. Major 
visceral components of the PNS (sympathetic trunk and 
prevertebral plexus) of the body are also associated mainly 
with the anterior rami of spinal nerves.
Spinal nerves
The 31 pairs of spinal nerves are segmental in distribution 
and emerge from the vertebral canal between the pedicles 
of adjacent vertebrae. There are eight pairs of cervical 
nerves (C1 to C8), twelve thoracic (T1 to T12), five lumbar 
(L1 to L5), five sacral (S1 to S5), and one coccygeal (Co). 
Each nerve is attached to the spinal cord by a posterior root 
and an anterior root (Fig. 2.9).
After exiting the vertebral canal, each spinal nerve 
branches into:
Fig. 2.9  Spinal nerves (transverse section). 
Sympathetic ganglion
Aorta
Anterior ramus
Posterior ramus
Spinal nerve
Extradural space
Arachnoid mater
Dura mater
Subarachnoid space
Prevertebral plexus
Visceral components
Posterior root
Spinal cord
Pia mater
Lamina
Spinous process
Anterior root
Vertebral body
Prevertebral ganglion
(sympathetic)

=== PAGE 60 ===
2
59
Conceptual Overview  •  Relationship to Other Regions
The brain and cranial meninges are continuous with 
the spinal cord meninges at the foramen magnum of the 
skull. The paired vertebral arteries ascend, one on each 
side, through foramina in the transverse processes of cervi­
cal vertebrae and pass through the foramen magnum to 
participate, with the internal carotid arteries, in supplying 
blood to the brain.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGIONS
Head
Cervical regions of the back constitute the skeletal and 
much of the muscular framework of the neck, which in 
turn supports and moves the head (Fig. 2.10).
Fig. 2.10  Relationships of the back to other regions. 
Cervical region
• supports and moves head
• transmits spinal cord and 
  vertebral arteries between 
  head and neck 
Thoracic region
• support for thorax
Lumbar region
• support for abdomen
Sacral region
• transmits weight to lower 
  limbs through pelvic bones
• framework for posterior 
  aspect of pelvis
Vertebral arteries travel
in transverse processes of
C6-C1, then pass through
foramen magnum

=== PAGE 61 ===
Back
60
Thorax, abdomen, and pelvis
The different regions of the vertebral column contribute to 
the skeletal framework of the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis 
(Fig. 2.10). In addition to providing support for each of 
these parts of the body, the vertebrae provide attachments 
for muscles and fascia, and articulation sites for other 
bones. The anterior rami of spinal nerves associated with 
the thorax, abdomen, and pelvis pass into these parts of 
the body from the back.
Limbs
The bones of the back provide extensive attachments for 
muscles associated with anchoring and moving the upper 
limbs on the trunk. This is less true of the lower limbs, 
which are firmly anchored to the vertebral column through 
articulation of the pelvic bones with the sacrum. The 
upper and lower limbs are innervated by anterior rami of 
spinal nerves that emerge from cervical and lumbosacral 
levels, respectively, of the vertebral column.
KEY FEATURES
Long vertebral column and short 
spinal cord
During development, the vertebral column grows much 
faster than the spinal cord. As a result, the spinal cord 
does not extend the entire length of the vertebral canal 
(Fig. 2.11).
In the adult, the spinal cord typically ends between 
vertebrae LI and LII, although it can end as high as vertebra 
TXII and as low as the disc between vertebrae LII and LIII.
Spinal nerves originate from the spinal cord at increas­
ingly oblique angles from vertebrae CI to Co, and the nerve 
roots pass in the vertebral canal for increasingly longer 
distances. Their spinal cord level of origin therefore 
becomes increasingly dissociated from their vertebral 
column level of exit. This is particularly evident for lumbar 
and sacral spinal nerves.
Fig. 2.11  Vertebral canal, spinal cord, and spinal nerves. 
1
12
11
10
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
9
5
6
7
8
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Co
C7
C6
C5
C4
Cervical
enlargement
(of spinal cord)
C2
C3
C1
Subarachnoid
space
Lumbosacral
enlargement
(of spinal cord)
Arachnoid mater
End of spinal
cord at LI–LII
vertebrae
End of
subarachnoid
space–sacral
vertebra II
Dura mater
Pedicles of
vertebrae
Spinal
ganglion

=== PAGE 62 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Features
2
61
Fig. 2.12  Intervertebral foramina. 
Spinal
nerve
Intervertebral
disc
Intervertebral
foramen
Superior vertebral notch
Inferior articular process
Superior articular process
Joint between
superior and inferior
articular processes
(zygapophysial joint)
Inferior vertebral notch
Fig. 2.13  Dermatomes innervated by posterior rami of spinal 
nerves. 
C2
C3
C4
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
L5
S1
S2
S4
S3
S5, Co
*The dorsal rami of L4 and L5 may not have cutaneous
branches and may therefore not be represented as
dermatomes on the back
L4
L3
L2
L1
T11
T12
T10
Intervertebral foramina and spinal nerves
Each spinal nerve exits the vertebral canal laterally through 
an intervertebral foramen (Fig. 2.12). The foramen is 
formed between adjacent vertebral arches and is closely 
related to intervertebral joints:
■	 The superior and inferior margins are formed by notches 
in adjacent pedicles.
■	 The posterior margin is formed by the articular processes 
of the vertebral arches and the associated joint.
■	 The anterior border is formed by the intervertebral 
disc between the vertebral bodies of the adjacent 
vertebrae.
Any pathology that occludes or reduces the size of an 
intervertebral foramen, such as bone loss, herniation of 
the intervertebral disc, or dislocation of the zygapophysial 
joint (the joint between the articular processes), can affect 
the function of the associated spinal nerve.
Innervation of the back
Posterior branches of spinal nerves innervate the intrinsic 
muscles of the back and adjacent skin. The cutaneous 
distribution of these posterior rami extends into the gluteal 
region of the lower limb and the posterior aspect of the 
head. Parts of dermatomes innervated by the posterior 
rami of spinal nerves are shown in Fig. 2.13.

=== PAGE 63 ===
Back
62
Regional anatomy
SKELETAL FRAMEWORK
Skeletal components of the back consist mainly of the 
vertebrae and associated intervertebral discs. The skull, 
scapulae, pelvic bones, and ribs also contribute to the bony 
framework of the back and provide sites for muscle 
attachment.
Fig. 2.14  Vertebrae. 
Posterior
Anterior
Foramen
transversarium
7 Cervical 
   vertebrae
12 Thoracic 
     vertebrae
5 Lumbar 
   vertebrae
Sacrum
Coccyx
Rib
Cervical vertebra
Thoracic vertebra
Lumbar vertebra
Fused costal
(rib) element
Fused costal
(rib) element
Vertebrae
There are approximately 33 vertebrae, which are subdi­
vided into five groups based on morphology and location 
(Fig. 2.14):
■	 The seven cervical vertebrae between the thorax and 
skull are characterized mainly by their small size and 
the presence of a foramen in each transverse process 
(Figs. 2.14 and 2.15).

=== PAGE 64 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
63
Fig. 2.15  Radiograph of cervical region of vertebral column. A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view. 
A
Rib II
CII
Spinous process of CVII
Vertebral
body of CIII
Location of
intervertebral disc
Vertebra prominens
(spinous process of CVII)
Posterior tubercle
of CI (atlas)
B

=== PAGE 65 ===
Back
64
Fig. 2.16  Radiograph of thoracic region of vertebral column. A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view. 
Rib
Pedicle
Location of intervertebral disc
Spinous process
Transverse process
Vertebral body
A
B
Intervertebral foramen
Vertebral body
Location of intervertebral disc
■	 The 12 thoracic vertebrae are characterized by their 
articulated ribs (Figs. 2.14 and 2.16); although all 
vertebrae have rib elements, these elements are small 
and are incorporated into the transverse processes in 
regions other than the thorax; but in the thorax, the ribs 
are separate bones and articulate via synovial joints 
with the vertebral bodies and transverse processes of 
the associated vertebrae.
■	 Inferior to the thoracic vertebrae are five lumbar verte­
brae, which form the skeletal support for the posterior 
abdominal wall and are characterized by their large size 
(Figs. 2.14 and 2.17).
■	 Next are five sacral vertebrae fused into one single bone 
called the sacrum, which articulates on each side with 
a pelvic bone and is a component of the pelvic wall.
■	 Inferior to the sacrum is a variable number, usually four, 
of coccygeal vertebrae, which fuse into a single small 
triangular bone called the coccyx.
In the embryo, the vertebrae are formed intersegmen­
tally from cells called sclerotomes, which originate from 
adjacent somites (Fig. 2.18). Each vertebra is derived from 
the cranial parts of the two somites below, one on each 
side, and the caudal parts of the two somites above. The 

=== PAGE 66 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
65
Fig. 2.17  Radiograph of lumbar region of vertebral column. A. Anteroposterior view. B. Lateral view. 
Rib
Transverse process
Pedicle
Spinous process of LIV
A
Location of
intervertebral disc
Vertebral body of LIII
Intervertebral foramen
B
Fig. 2.18  Development of the vertebrae. 
Migrating sclerotome cells
Somites
Developing
spinal nerve
Developing
spinal nerve
Somites
Sclerotome
Neural tube
Forming vertebra
Caudal
Cranial

=== PAGE 67 ===
Back
66
spinal nerves develop segmentally and pass between the 
forming vertebrae.
Typical vertebra
A typical vertebra consists of a vertebral body and a poste­
rior vertebral arch (Fig. 2.19). Extending from the vertebral 
arch are a number of processes for muscle attachment and 
articulation with adjacent bone.
The vertebral body is the weight-bearing part of the 
vertebra and is linked to adjacent vertebral bodies by 
intervertebral discs and ligaments. The size of vertebral 
bodies increases inferiorly as the amount of weight sup­
ported increases.
The vertebral arch forms the lateral and posterior 
parts of the vertebral foramen.
The vertebral foramina of all the vertebrae together 
form the vertebral canal, which contains and protects 
the spinal cord. Superiorly, the vertebral canal is continu­
ous, through the foramen magnum of the skull, with the 
cranial cavity of the head.
Fig. 2.19  Typical vertebra. 
Superior articular process
Superior vertebral notch
Inferior vertebral notch
Inferior articular process
Vertebral
body
Pedicle
Lamina
Spinous process
Vertebral
arch
Transverse process
Superior view
Superolateral oblique view
The vertebral arch of each vertebra consists of pedicles 
and laminae (Fig. 2.19):
■	 The two pedicles are bony pillars that attach the verte­
bral arch to the vertebral body.
■	 The two laminae are flat sheets of bone that extend 
from each pedicle to meet in the midline and form the 
roof of the vertebral arch.
A spinous process projects posteriorly and inferiorly 
from the junction of the two laminae and is a site for 
muscle and ligament attachment.
A transverse process extends posterolaterally from 
the junction of the pedicle and lamina on each side and is 
a site for muscle and ligament attachment, and for articu­
lation with ribs in the thoracic region.
Also projecting from the region where the pedicles join the 
laminae are superior and inferior articular processes 
(Fig. 2.19), which articulate with the inferior and superior 
articular processes, respectively, of adjacent vertebrae.

=== PAGE 68 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
67
■	 The vertebral body is short in height and square shaped 
when viewed from above and has a concave superior 
surface and a convex inferior surface.
■	 Each transverse process is trough shaped and perforated 
by a round foramen transversarium.
■	 The spinous process is short and bifid.
■	 The vertebral foramen is triangular.
The first and second cervical vertebrae—the atlas 
and axis—are specialized to accommodate movement of 
the head.
Between the vertebral body and the origin of the 
articular processes, each pedicle is notched on its superior 
and inferior surfaces. These superior and inferior ver­
tebral notches participate in forming intervertebral 
foramina.
Cervical vertebrae
The seven cervical vertebrae are characterized by their 
small size and by the presence of a foramen in each trans­
verse process. A typical cervical vertebra has the following 
features (Fig. 2.20A):
Vertebral body
Transverse 
process
Foramen transversarium
Foramen
transversarium
Uncinate process
Vertebral canal
Spinous process
Spinous process
Superior view
Anterior view
A
Fig. 2.20  Regional vertebrae. A. Typical cervical vertebra.
Continued

=== PAGE 69 ===
Back
68
Transverse 
process
Dens
Dens
Foramen 
transversarium
Superior view
Superior view
Superior view
Posterior view
Posterosuperior view
B
Anterior tubercle
Posterior tubercle
Anterior arch
Lateral mass
Posterior arch
Facet for dens
Facet for occipital condyle
Impressions
for alar
ligaments
Alar
ligaments
Tectorial membrane (upper part
of posterior longitudinal ligament)
Posterior
longitudinal
ligament
Facets for
attachment of
alar ligaments
Atlas (CI vertebra)
Atlas (CI vertebra) and Axis (CII vertebra)
Atlas (CI
vertebra)
and Axis
(CII 
vertebra)
and base
of skull
Axis (CII vertebra)
Transverse ligament of atlas
Transverse ligament of atlas
Vertebral body
Transverse 
process
Transverse
process
Spinous
process
Mammillary
process
Spinous
process
Superior view
Lateral view
Superior view
Facet for articulation
with tubercle of
its own rib
Demifacet for articulation
with head of rib below
Demifacet for articulation
with head of its own rib
C
D
Apical ligament
of dens
Inferior longitudinal
band of cruciform
ligament
Fig. 2.20, cont’d B. Atlas and axis. C. Typical thoracic vertebra. D. Typical lumbar vertebra.

=== PAGE 70 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
69
Anterior view
Dorsolateral view
Posterior view
Facet for 
articulation 
with pelvic bone
E
F
Anterior sacral 
foramina
Posterior sacral 
foramina
Coccygeal cornu
Incomplete 
sacral canal
Fig. 2.20, cont’d E. Sacrum. F. Coccyx. 
Atlas and axis
Vertebra CI (the atlas) articulates with the head (Fig. 
2.21). Its major distinguishing feature is that it lacks a 
vertebral body (Fig. 2.20B). In fact, the vertebral body of 
CI fuses onto the body of CII during development to become 
the dens of CII. As a result, there is no intervertebral disc 
Fig. 2.21  Radiograph showing CI (atlas) and CII (axis) vertebrae. 
Open mouth, anteroposterior (odontoid peg) view. 
Superior articular
facet of CII
Dens
Inferior articular facet
on lateral mass of CI
between CI and CII. When viewed from above, the atlas is 
ring shaped and composed of two lateral masses inter­
connected by an anterior arch and a posterior arch.
Each lateral mass articulates above with an occipital 
condyle of the skull and below with the superior articular 
process of vertebra CII (the axis). The superior articular 
surfaces are bean shaped and concave, whereas the infe­
rior articular surfaces are almost circular and flat.
The atlanto-occipital joint allows the head to nod up 
and down on the vertebral column.
The posterior surface of the anterior arch has an articu­
lar facet for the dens, which projects superiorly from the 
vertebral body of the axis. The dens is held in position by a 
strong transverse ligament of  atlas posterior to it and 
spanning the distance between the oval attachment facets 
on the medial surfaces of the lateral masses of the atlas.
The dens acts as a pivot that allows the atlas and 
attached head to rotate on the axis, side to side.
The transverse processes of the atlas are large and 
protrude further laterally than those of the other cervical 
vertebrae and act as levers for muscle action, particularly 
for muscles that move the head at the atlanto-axial 
joints.
The axis is characterized by the large tooth-like 
dens, which extends superiorly from the vertebral body 
(Figs. 2.20B and 2.21). The anterior surface of the dens 
has an oval facet for articulation with the anterior arch of 
the atlas.
The two superolateral surfaces of the dens possess cir­
cular impressions that serve as attachment sites for strong 
alar ligaments, one on each side, which connect the dens 
to the medial surfaces of the occipital condyles. These alar 
ligaments check excessive rotation of the head and atlas 
relative to the axis.

=== PAGE 71 ===
Back
70
Thoracic vertebrae
The twelve thoracic vertebrae are all characterized by their 
articulation with ribs. A typical thoracic vertebra has two 
partial facets (superior and inferior costal facets) on each 
side of the vertebral body for articulation with the head 
of its own rib and the head of the rib below (Fig. 2.20C). 
The superior costal facet is much larger than the inferior 
costal facet.
Each transverse process also has a facet (transverse 
costal facet) for articulation with the tubercle of its own 
rib. The vertebral body of the vertebra is somewhat heart 
shaped when viewed from above, and the vertebral foramen 
is circular.
Lumbar vertebrae
The five lumbar vertebrae are distinguished from vertebrae 
in other regions by their large size (Fig. 2.20D). Also, they 
lack facets for articulation with ribs. The transverse proc­
esses are generally thin and long, with the exception of 
those on vertebra LV, which are massive and somewhat 
cone shaped for the attachment of iliolumbar ligaments 
to connect the transverse processes to the pelvic bones.
The vertebral body of a typical lumbar vertebra is cylin­
drical and the vertebral foramen is triangular in shape and 
larger than in the thoracic vertebrae.
Sacrum
The sacrum is a single bone that represents the five fused 
sacral vertebrae (Fig. 2.20E). It is triangular in shape with 
the apex pointed inferiorly, and is curved so that it has a 
concave anterior surface and a correspondingly convex 
posterior surface. It articulates above with vertebra LV 
Fig. 2.22  Intervertebral foramen. 
Zygapophysial joint
Inferior vertebral notch
Intervertebral foramen
Intervertebral disc
Superior vertebral notch
and below with the coccyx. It has two large L-shaped 
facets, one on each lateral surface, for articulation with the 
pelvic bones.
The posterior surface of the sacrum has four pairs of 
posterior sacral foramina, and the anterior surface has 
four pairs of anterior sacral foramina for the passage of 
the posterior and anterior rami, respectively, of S1 to S4 
spinal nerves.
The posterior wall of the vertebral canal may be incom­
plete near the inferior end of the sacrum.
Coccyx
The coccyx is a small triangular bone that articulates with 
the inferior end of the sacrum and represents three to four 
fused coccygeal vertebrae (Fig. 2.20F). It is characterized 
by its small size and by the absence of vertebral arches and 
therefore a vertebral canal.
Intervertebral foramina
Intervertebral foramina are formed on each side between 
adjacent parts of vertebrae and associated intervertebral 
discs (Fig. 2.22). The foramina allow structures, such as 
spinal nerves and blood vessels, to pass in and out of the 
vertebral canal.
An intervertebral foramen is formed by the inferior 
vertebral notch on the pedicle of the vertebra above and 
the superior vertebral notch on the pedicle of the vertebra 
below. The foramen is bordered:
■	 posteriorly by the zygapophysial joint between the 
articular processes of the two vertebrae, and

=== PAGE 72 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
71
reasonably complete bony dorsal wall for the vertebral 
canal. However, in the lumbar region, large gaps exist 
between the posterior components of adjacent vertebral 
arches (Fig. 2.23). These gaps between adjacent laminae 
and spinous processes become increasingly wide from 
vertebra LI to vertebra LV. The spaces can be widened 
further by flexion of the vertebral column. These gaps 
allow relatively easy access to the vertebral canal for clini­
cal procedures.
■	 anteriorly by the intervertebral disc and adjacent verte­
bral bodies.
Each intervertebral foramen is a confined space sur­
rounded by bone and ligament, and by joints. Pathology in 
any of these structures, and in the surrounding muscles, 
can affect structures within the foramen.
Posterior spaces between vertebral arches
In most regions of the vertebral column, the laminae and 
spinous processes of adjacent vertebrae overlap to form a 
Fig. 2.23  Spaces between adjacent vertebral arches in the lumbar region. 
Lamina
Spinous process
Lamina
Spinous process
Space between
adjacent laminae
Lumbar vertebrae
Thoracic vertebrae

=== PAGE 73 ===
Back
72
In the clinic
Spina bifida
Spina bifida is a disorder in which the two sides of vertebral 
arches, usually in lower vertebrae, fail to fuse during 
development, resulting in an “open” vertebral canal (Fig. 
2.24). There are two types of spina bifida.
■	 The commonest type is spina bifida occulta, in which 
there is a defect in the vertebral arch of LV or SI. This 
defect occurs in as many as 10% of individuals and 
results in failure of the posterior arch to fuse in the 
midline. Clinically, the patient is asymptomatic, 
although physical examination may reveal a tuft of 
hair over the spinous processes.
■	 The more severe form of spina bifida involves 
complete failure of fusion of the posterior arch at the 
lumbosacral junction, with a large outpouching of the 
meninges. This may contain cerebrospinal fluid (a 
meningocele) or a portion of the spinal cord (a 
myelomeningocele). These abnormalities may result in 
a variety of neurological deficits, including problems 
with walking and bladder function.
Fig. 2.24  T1-weighted MR image in the sagittal plane 
demonstrating a lumbosacral myelomeningocele. There is an 
absence of laminae and spinous processes in the lumbosacral 
region. 
Spinal
cord
Myelomeningocele
Vertebral
spinous process
Brain
Fourth ventricle
Thoracic aorta
Vertebral
body

=== PAGE 74 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
73
In the clinic
Vertebroplasty
Vertebroplasty is a relatively new technique in which the 
body of a vertebra can be filled with bone cement (typically 
methyl methacrylate). The indications for the technique 
include vertebral body collapse and pain from the vertebral 
body, which may be secondary to tumor infiltration. The 
procedure is most commonly performed for osteoporotic 
wedge fractures, which are a considerable cause of 
morbidity and pain in older patients.
Osteoporotic wedge fractures (Fig. 2.25) typically occur in 
the thoracolumbar region, and the approach to performing 
vertebroplasty is novel and relatively straightforward. The 
procedure is performed under sedation or light general 
anesthetic. Using X-ray guidance the pedicle is identified on 
the anteroposterior image. A metal cannula is placed through 
the pedicle into the vertebral body. Liquid bone cement is 
injected via the cannula into the vertebral body (Fig. 2.26). 
The function of the bone cement is two-fold. First, it 
increases the strength of the vertebral body and prevents 
further loss of height. Furthermore, as the bone cement sets, 
there is a degree of heat generated that is believed to 
disrupt pain nerve endings. Kyphoplasty is a similar 
technique that aims to restore some or all of the lost 
vertebral body height from the wedge fracture by injecting 
liquid bone cement into the vertebral body.
Fig. 2.25  Radiograph of the lumbar region of the vertebral 
column demonstrating a wedge fracture of the L1 vertebra. This 
condition is typically seen in patients with osteoporosis. 
Wedge fracture
Fig. 2.26  Radiograph of the lumbar region of the vertebral 
column demonstrating three intrapedicular needles, all of which 
have been placed into the middle of the vertebral bodies. The 
high-density material is radiopaque bone cement, which has 
been injected as a liquid that will harden. 

=== PAGE 75 ===
Back
74
In the clinic
Scoliosis
Scoliosis is an abnormal lateral curvature of the vertebral 
column (Fig. 2.27).
A true scoliosis involves not only the curvature (right- or 
left-sided) but also a rotational element of one vertebra upon 
another.
The commonest types of scoliosis are those for which we 
have little understanding about how or why they occur and 
are termed idiopathic scoliosis. It is thought that there is 
some initial axial rotation of the vertebrae, which then alters 
the locations of the mechanical compressive and distractive 
forces applied through the vertebral growth plates, leading 
to changes in speed of bone growth and ultimately changes 
to spinal curvature. These are never present at birth and tend 
to occur in either the infantile, juvenile, or adolescent age 
groups. The vertebral bodies and posterior elements 
(pedicles and laminae) are normal in these patients.
When a scoliosis is present from birth (congenital 
scoliosis) it is usually associated with other developmental 
abnormalities. In these patients, there is a strong association 
with other abnormalities of the chest wall, genitourinary 
tract, and heart disease. This group of patients needs careful 
evaluation by many specialists.
A rare but important group of scoliosis is that in which the 
muscle is abnormal. Muscular dystrophy is the commonest 
example. The abnormal muscle does not retain the normal 
alignment of the vertebral column, and curvature develops as 
a result. A muscle biopsy is needed to make the diagnosis.
Other disorders that can produce scoliosis include bone 
tumors, spinal cord tumors, and localized disc protrusions.
A
Fig. 2.27  Severe scoliosis. A. Radiograph, anteroposterior view. B. Volume-rendered CT, anterior view. 
B

=== PAGE 76 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
75
In the clinic
Lordosis
Lordosis is abnormal curvature of the vertebral column in 
the lumbar region, producing a swayback deformity.
In the clinic
Kyphosis
Kyphosis is abnormal curvature of the vertebral column in 
the thoracic region, producing a “hunchback” deformity. This 
condition occurs in certain disease states, the most dramatic 
of which is usually secondary to tuberculosis infection of a 
thoracic vertebral body, where the kyphosis becomes 
angulated at the site of the lesion. This produces the gibbus 
deformity, a deformity that was prevalent before the use of 
antituberculous medication (Fig. 2.28).
Fig. 2.28  Sagittal CT showing kyphosis. 

=== PAGE 77 ===
Back
76
In the clinic
Variation in vertebral numbers
There are usually seven cervical vertebrae, although 
in certain diseases these may be fused. Fusion of 
cervical vertebrae (Fig. 2.29A) can be associated with 
other abnormalities, for example Klippel-Feil syndrome, 
in which there is fusion of vertebrae CI and CII or CV 
and CVI, and may be associated with a high-riding 
scapula (Sprengel’s shoulder) and cardiac 
abnormalities.
Variations in the number of thoracic vertebrae also are 
well described.
One of the commonest abnormalities in the lumbar 
vertebrae is a partial fusion of vertebra LV with the sacrum 
(sacralization of the lumbar vertebra). Partial separation of 
vertebra SI from the sacrum (lumbarization of first sacral 
vertebra) may also occur (Fig. 2.29B). The LV vertebra can 
usually be identified by the iliolumbar ligament, which is a 
band of connective tissue that runs from the tip of the 
transverse process of LV to the iliac crest bilaterally 
(Fig. 2.29C).
A hemivertebra occurs when a vertebra develops only on 
one side (Fig. 2.29B).
Fig. 2.29  Variations in vertebral number. A. Fused vertebral bodies of cervical vertebrae. B. Hemivertebra. C. Axial slice MRI through the 
LV vertebra. The iliolumbar ligament runs from the tip of the LV vertebra transverse process to the iliac crest. 
Fused bodies of cervical vertebrae
A
Hemivertebra
Partial lumbarization of first sacral vertebra
B
C
Iliolumbar
ligament

=== PAGE 78 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Skeletal Framework
2
77
In the clinic
The vertebrae and cancer
The vertebrae are common sites for metastatic disease 
(secondary spread of cancer cells). When cancer cells grow 
within the vertebral bodies and the posterior elements, they 
interrupt normal bone cell turnover, leading to either bone 
destruction or formation and destroying the mechanical 
properties of the bone. A minor injury may therefore lead to 
vertebral collapse (Fig. 2.30A). Cancer cells have a much 
higher glucose metabolism compared with normal adjacent 
bone cells. These metastatic cancer cells can therefore be 
detected by administering radioisotope-labeled glucose to a 
patient and then tracing where the labeled glucose has been 
metabolized (Fig. 2.30B). Importantly, vertebrae that contain 
extensive metastatic disease may extrude fragments of 
tumor into the vertebral canal, compressing nerves and the 
spinal cord.
A
B2
B1
Fig. 2.30  A. MRI of a spine with multiple collapsed vertebrae due to diffuse metastatic myeloma infiltration. B1, B2. Positron emission 
tomography CT (PETCT) study detecting cancer cells in the spine that have high glucose metabolism. 

=== PAGE 79 ===
Back
78
In the clinic
Osteoporosis
Osteoporosis is a pathophysiologic condition in which 
bone quality is normal but the quantity of bone is 
deficient. It is a metabolic bone disorder that commonly 
occurs in women in their 50s and 60s and in men in 
their 70s.
Many factors influence the development of osteoporosis, 
including genetic predetermination, level of activity and 
nutritional status, and, in particular, estrogen levels in 
women.
Typical complications of osteoporosis include “crush” 
vertebral body fractures, distal fractures of the radius, and 
hip fractures.
With increasing age and poor-quality bone, patients are 
more susceptible to fracture. Healing tends to be impaired in 
these elderly patients, who consequently require long 
hospital stays and prolonged rehabilitation.
Patients likely to develop osteoporosis can be identified 
by dual-photon X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) scanning. 
Low-dose X-rays are passed through the bone, and by 
counting the number of photons detected and knowing the 
dose given, the number of X-rays absorbed by the bone can 
be calculated. The amount of X-ray absorption can be 
directly correlated with the bone mass, and this can be used 
to predict whether a patient is at risk for osteoporotic 
fractures.
JOINTS
Joints between vertebrae in the back
The two major types of joints between vertebrae are:
■	 symphyses between vertebral bodies (Fig. 2.31), and
■	 synovial joints between articular processes (Fig. 2.32).
A typical vertebra has a total of six joints with adjacent 
vertebrae: four synovial joints (two above and two below) 
and two symphyses (one above and one below). Each 
symphysis includes an intervertebral disc.
Although the movement between any two vertebrae is 
limited, the summation of movement among all vertebrae 
results in a large range of movement by the vertebral 
column.
Movements by the vertebral column include flexion, 
extension, lateral flexion, rotation, and circumduction.
Movements by vertebrae in a specific region (cervical, 
thoracic, and lumbar) are determined by the shape and 
orientation of joint surfaces on the articular processes and 
on the vertebral bodies.
Fig. 2.31  Intervertebral joints. 
Anulus fibrosus
Nucleus pulposus
Layer of 
hyaline
cartilage

=== PAGE 80 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Joints
2
79
Fig. 2.32  Zygapophysial joints. 
Zygapophysial joint
Zygapophysial joint
Zygapophysial joint
“Sloped from anterior
to posterior”
“Vertical”
“Wrapped”
Cervical 
Thoracic
Lumbar
Superior view
Lateral view
Lateral view
Lateral view
Symphyses between vertebral bodies 
(intervertebral discs)
The symphysis between adjacent vertebral bodies is formed 
by a layer of hyaline cartilage on each vertebral body and 
an intervertebral disc, which lies between the layers.
The intervertebral disc consists of an outer anulus 
fibrosus, which surrounds a central nucleus pulposus (Fig. 
2.31).
■	 The anulus fibrosus consists of an outer ring of col­
lagen surrounding a wider zone of fibrocartilage 
arranged in a lamellar configuration. This arrangement 
of fibers limits rotation between vertebrae.
■	 The nucleus pulposus fills the center of the interver­
tebral disc, is gelatinous, and absorbs compression forces 
between vertebrae.
Degenerative changes in the anulus fibrosus can lead to 
herniation of the nucleus pulposus. Posterolateral hernia­
tion can impinge on the roots of a spinal nerve in the 
intervertebral foramen.
Joints between vertebral arches 
(zygapophysial joints)
The synovial joints between superior and inferior articular 
processes on adjacent vertebrae are the zygapophysial 
joints (Fig. 2.32). A thin articular capsule attached to the 
margins of the articular facets encloses each joint.
In cervical regions, the zygapophysial joints slope infe­
riorly from anterior to posterior and their shape facilitates 
flexion and extension. In thoracic regions, the joints are 
oriented vertically and their shape limits flexion and exten­
sion, but facilitates rotation. In lumbar regions, the joint 
surfaces are curved and adjacent processes interlock, 
thereby limiting range of movement, though flexion and 
extension are still major movements in the lumbar region.
“Uncovertebral” joints
The lateral margins of the upper surfaces of typical cervi­
cal vertebrae are elevated into crests or lips termed uncinate 
processes. These may articulate with the body of the ver­
tebra above to form small “uncovertebral” synovial joints 
(Fig. 2.33).

=== PAGE 81 ===
Back
80
Fig. 2.33  Uncovertebral joint. 
CIV
CV
Uncovertebral joint
Uncinate process
In the clinic
Back pain
Back pain is an extremely common disorder. It can be 
related to mechanical problems or to disc protrusion 
impinging on a nerve. In cases involving discs, it may be 
necessary to operate and remove the disc that is pressing 
on the nerve.
Not infrequently, patients complain of pain and no 
immediate cause is found; the pain is therefore attributed 
to mechanical discomfort, which may be caused by 
degenerative disease. One of the treatments is to pass a 
needle into the facet joint and inject it with local 
anesthetic and corticosteroid.
In the clinic
Herniation of intervertebral discs
The discs between the vertebrae are made up of a central 
portion (the nucleus pulposus) and a complex series of 
fibrous rings (anulus fibrosus). A tear can occur within 
the anulus fibrosus through which the material of the 
nucleus pulposus can track. After a period of time, this 
material may track into the vertebral canal or into the 
intervertebral foramen to impinge on neural structures 
(Fig. 2.34). This is a common cause of back pain. A disc may 
protrude posteriorly to directly impinge on the cord or the 
roots of the lumbar nerves, depending on the level, or may 
protrude posterolaterally adjacent to the pedicle and impinge 
on the descending root.
In cervical regions of the vertebral column, cervical disc 
protrusions often become ossified and are termed disc 
osteophyte bars.
Fig. 2.34  Disc protrusion. T2-weighted magnetic resonance images of the lumbar region of the vertebral column. A. Sagittal plane. 
B. Axial plane. 
LIV vertebra
Disc protrusion
Vertebral canal containing CSF
and cauda equina
A
Disc protrusion
Meningeal sac containing 
CSF and cauda equina
Facet
Psoas
B

=== PAGE 82 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Ligaments
2
81
LIGAMENTS
Joints between vertebrae are reinforced and supported by 
numerous ligaments, which pass between vertebral bodies 
and interconnect components of the vertebral arches.
Anterior and posterior 
longitudinal ligaments
The anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments are on 
the anterior and posterior surfaces of the vertebral bodies 
and extend along most of the vertebral column (Fig. 2.35).
The anterior longitudinal ligament is attached 
superiorly to the base of the skull and extends inferiorly to 
attach to the anterior surface of the sacrum. Along its 
length it is attached to the vertebral bodies and interverte­
bral discs.
The posterior longitudinal ligament is on the poste­
rior surfaces of the vertebral bodies and lines the anterior 
surface of the vertebral canal. Like the anterior longitudi­
nal ligament, it is attached along its length to the vertebral 
bodies and intervertebral discs. The upper part of the pos­
terior longitudinal ligament that connects CII to the intra­
cranial aspect of the base of the skull is termed the tectorial 
membrane (see Fig. 2.20B).
Ligamenta flava
The ligamenta flava, on each side, pass between the 
laminae of adjacent vertebrae (Fig. 2.36). These thin, 
broad ligaments consist predominantly of elastic tissue 
and form part of the posterior surface of the vertebral 
In the clinic
Joint diseases
Some diseases have a predilection for synovial joints 
rather than symphyses. A typical example is rheumatoid 
arthritis, which primarily affects synovial joints and 
synovial bursae, resulting in destruction of the joint and 
its lining. Symphyses are usually preserved.
Fig. 2.35  Anterior and posterior longitudinal ligaments of vertebral 
column. 
Posterior longitudinal ligament
Anterior longitudinal ligament
canal. Each ligamentum flavum runs between the posterior 
surface of the lamina on the vertebra below to the anterior 
surface of the lamina of the vertebra above. The ligamenta 
flava resist separation of the laminae in flexion and assist 
in extension back to the anatomical position.
Supraspinous ligament 
and ligamentum nuchae
The supraspinous ligament connects and passes along 
the tips of the vertebral spinous processes from vertebra 

=== PAGE 83 ===
Back
82
Fig. 2.36  Ligamenta flava. 
Ligamenta flava
Ligamenta flava
Posterior
Vertebral canal
Inferior
Inferior
Superior
Superior
Fig. 2.37  Supraspinous ligament and ligamentum nuchae. 
Spinous process of
vertebra CVII
Ligamentum nuchae
External occipital
protuberance
Supraspinous ligament
CVII to the sacrum (Fig. 2.37). From vertebra CVII to 
the skull, the ligament becomes structurally distinct 
from more caudal parts of the ligament and is called the 
ligamentum nuchae.
The ligamentum nuchae is a triangular, sheet-like 
structure in the median sagittal plane:
■	 The base of the triangle is attached to the skull, from the 
external occipital protuberance to the foramen magnum.
■	 The apex is attached to the tip of the spinous process of 
vertebra CVII.
■	 The deep side of the triangle is attached to the posterior 
tubercle of vertebra CI and the spinous processes of the 
other cervical vertebrae.
The ligamentum nuchae supports the head. It resists 
flexion and facilitates returning the head to the anatomi­
cal position. The broad lateral surfaces and the posterior 
edge of the ligament provide attachment for adjacent 
muscles.
Interspinous ligaments
Interspinous ligaments pass between adjacent vertebral 
spinous processes (Fig. 2.38). They attach from the base to 
the apex of each spinous process and blend with the supra­
spinous ligament posteriorly and the ligamenta flava 
anteriorly on each side.

=== PAGE 84 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Ligaments
2
83
Fig. 2.38  Interspinous ligaments. 
Supraspinous ligament
Interspinous ligament
Supraspinous ligament
Ligamentum flavum
Ligamentum flavum
In the clinic
Ligamenta flava
The ligamenta flava are important structures associated 
with the vertebral canal (Fig. 2.39). In degenerative 
conditions of the vertebral column, the ligamenta flava 
may hypertrophy. This is often associated with 
hypertrophy and arthritic change of the zygapophysial 
joints. In combination, zygapophysial joint hypertrophy, 
ligamenta flava hypertrophy, and a mild disc protrusion 
can reduce the dimensions of the vertebral canal, 
producing the syndrome of spinal stenosis.
Ligamentum
flavum
Fig. 2.39  Axial slice MRI through the lumbar spine 
demonstrating bilateral hypertrophy of the ligamentum 
flavum. 
In the clinic
Vertebral fractures
Vertebral fractures can occur anywhere along the vertebral 
column. In most instances, the fracture will heal under 
appropriate circumstances. At the time of injury, it is not the 
fracture itself but related damage to the contents of the 
vertebral canal and the surrounding tissues that determines 
the severity of the patient’s condition.
Vertebral column stability is divided into three arbitrary 
clinical “columns”: the anterior column consists of the 
vertebral bodies and the anterior longitudinal ligament; the 
middle column comprises the vertebral body and the 
posterior longitudinal ligament; and the posterior column is 
made up of the ligamenta flava, interspinous ligaments, 
supraspinous ligaments, and the ligamentum nuchae in the 
cervical vertebral column.
Destruction of one of the clinical columns is usually a 
stable injury requiring little more than rest and appropriate 
analgesia. Disruption of two columns is highly likely to be 
unstable and requires fixation and immobilization. A 
three-column spinal injury usually results in a significant 
neurological event and requires fixation to prevent further 
extension of the neurological defect and to create vertebral 
column stability.
At the craniocervical junction, a complex series of 
ligaments create stability. If the traumatic incident disrupts 
craniocervical stability, the chances of a significant spinal 
cord injury are extremely high. The consequences are 
quadriplegia. In addition, respiratory function may be 
compromised by paralysis of the phrenic nerve (which arises 
from spinal nerves C3 to C5), and severe hypotension (low 
blood pressure) may result from central disruption of the 
sympathetic part of the autonomic division of the nervous 
system.
(continues)

=== PAGE 85 ===
Back
84
In the clinic—cont’d
Mid and lower cervical vertebral column disruption may 
produce a range of complex neurological problems involving 
the upper and lower limbs, although below the level of C5, 
respiratory function is unlikely to be compromised.
Lumbar vertebral column injuries are rare. When they 
occur, they usually involve significant force. Knowing that a 
significant force is required to fracture a vertebra, one must 
assess the abdominal organs and the rest of the axial 
skeleton for further fractures and visceral rupture.
Vertebral injuries may also involve the soft tissues and 
supporting structures between the vertebrae. Typical 
examples of this are the unifacetal and bifacetal cervical 
vertebral dislocations that occur in hyperflexion injuries.
Pars interarticularis fractures
The pars interarticularis is a clinical term to describe the 
specific region of a vertebra between the superior and 
inferior facet (zygapophysial) joints (Fig. 2.40A). This region 
is susceptible to trauma, especially in athletes.
If a fracture occurs around the pars interarticularis, the 
vertebral body may slip anteriorly and compress the 
vertebral canal.
The most common sites for pars interarticularis fractures 
are the LIV and LV levels (Fig. 2.40B,C). (Clinicians often refer 
to parts of the back in shorthand terms that are not strictly 
anatomical; for example, facet joints and apophyseal joints 
are terms used instead of zygapophysial joints, and spinal 
column is used instead of vertebral column.)
It is possible for a vertebra to slip anteriorly upon its 
inferior counterpart without a pars interarticularis fracture. 
Usually this is related to abnormal anatomy of the facet 
joints, facet joint degenerative change. This disorder is 
termed spondylolisthesis.
Fig. 2.40  Radiograph of lumbar region of vertebral column, oblique view (“Scottie dog”). A. Normal radiograph of lumbar region of 
vertebral column, oblique view. In this view, the transverse process (nose), pedicle (eye), superior articular process (ear), inferior articular 
process (front leg), and pars interarticularis (neck) resemble a dog. A fracture of the pars interarticularis is visible as a break in the neck of 
the dog, or the appearance of a collar. B. Fracture of pars interarticularis. C. CT of lumbar spine shows fracture of the LV pars 
interarticularis. 
Pars interarticularis
Pedicle
Superior articular process
A
Pars interarticularis 
fracture
Pars fracture
B
C

=== PAGE 86 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Ligaments
2
85
In the clinic
Surgical procedures on the back
Discectomy/laminectomy
A prolapsed intervertebral disc may impinge upon the 
meningeal (thecal) sac, cord, and most commonly the nerve 
root, producing symptoms attributable to that level. In some 
instances the disc protrusion will undergo a degree of 
involution that may allow symptoms to resolve without 
intervention. In some instances pain, loss of function, and 
failure to resolve may require surgery to remove the disc 
protrusion.
It is of the utmost importance that the level of the disc 
protrusion is identified before surgery. This may require MRI 
scanning and on-table fluoroscopy to prevent operating on 
the wrong level. A midline approach to the right or to the 
left of the spinous processes will depend upon the most 
prominent site of the disc bulge. In some instances removal 
of the lamina will increase the potential space and may 
relieve symptoms. Some surgeons perform a small 
fenestration (windowing) within the ligamentum flavum. 
This provides access to the canal. The meningeal sac and its 
contents are gently retracted, exposing the nerve root and 
the offending disc. The disc is dissected free, removing its 
effect on the nerve root and the canal.
Spinal Fusion
Spinal fusion is performed when it is necessary to fuse one 
vertebra with the corresponding superior or inferior vertebra, 
and in some instances multilevel fusion may be necessary. 
Indications are varied, though they include stabilization after 
fracture, stabilization related to tumor infiltration, and 
stabilization when mechanical pain is produced either from 
the disc or from the posterior elements.
There are a number of surgical methods in which a fusion 
can be performed, through either a posterior approach and 
fusing the posterior elements, an anterior approach by 
removal of the disc and either disc replacement or anterior 
fusion, or in some instances a 360° fusion where the 
posterior elements and the vertebral bodies are fused 
(Fig. 2.41A,B).
Fig. 2.41  A. Anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF). B. Posterior lumbar interbody fusion (PLIF). 
A
B

=== PAGE 87 ===
Back
86
BACK MUSCULATURE
Muscles of the back are organized into superficial, interme­
diate, and deep groups.
Muscles in the superficial and intermediate groups are 
extrinsic muscles because they originate embryologically 
from locations other than the back. They are innervated by 
anterior rami of spinal nerves:
■	 The superficial group consists of muscles related to and 
involved in movements of the upper limb.
■	 The intermediate group consists of muscles attached to 
the ribs and may serve a respiratory function.
Muscles of the deep group are intrinsic muscles because 
they develop in the back. They are innervated by posterior 
rami of spinal nerves and are directly related to movements 
of the vertebral column and head.
Superficial group of back muscles
The muscles in the superficial group are immediately deep 
to the skin and superficial fascia (Figs. 2.42 to 2.45). They 
attach the superior part of the appendicular skeleton 
(clavicle, scapula, and humerus) to the axial skeleton 
(skull, ribs, and vertebral column). Because these muscles 
are primarily involved with movements of this part of the 
appendicular skeleton, they are sometimes referred to as 
the appendicular group.
Muscles in the superficial group include the trapezius, 
latissimus dorsi, rhomboid major, rhomboid minor, and 
levator scapulae. The rhomboid major, rhomboid minor, 
and levator scapulae muscles are located deep to the trape­
zius muscle in the superior part of the back.

=== PAGE 88 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
87
Fig. 2.42  Superficial group of back muscles—trapezius and latissimus dorsi. 
Spinous process of CVII
Acromion
Spine of scapula
Iliac crest
Greater occipital nerve
(posterior ramus of C2)
Third occipital nerve
(posterior ramus of C3)
Medial branches of posterior rami
Lateral branches 
of posterior rami
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Thoracolumbar fascia

=== PAGE 89 ===
Back
88
Fig. 2.43  Superficial group of back muscles—trapezius and latissimus dorsi, with rhomboid major, rhomboid minor, and levator scapulae 
located deep to trapezius in the superior part of the back. 
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Levator scapulae
Ligamentum nuchae

=== PAGE 90 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
89
Fig. 2.44  Innervation and blood supply of trapezius. 
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Levator scapulae
Accessory nerve [XI]
Superficial branch of transverse cervical artery
Trapezius
Each trapezius muscle is flat and triangular, with the base 
of the triangle situated along the vertebral column (the 
muscle’s origin) and the apex pointing toward the tip of the 
shoulder (the muscle’s insertion) (Fig. 2.43 and Table 2.1). 
The muscles on both sides together form a trapezoid.
The superior fibers of the trapezius, from the skull and 
upper portion of the vertebral column, descend to attach 
to the lateral third of the clavicle and to the acromion 
of the scapula. Contraction of these fibers elevates the 
scapula. In addition, the superior and inferior fibers work 
together to rotate the lateral aspect of the scapula upward, 
which needs to occur when raising the upper limb above 
the head.
Motor innervation of the trapezius is by the accessory 
nerve [XI], which descends from the neck onto the deep 
surface of the muscle (Fig. 2.44). Proprioceptive fibers from 
the trapezius pass in the branches of the cervical plexus 
and enter the spinal cord at spinal cord levels C3 and C4.
The blood supply to the trapezius is from the superficial 
branch of the transverse cervical artery, the acromial 
branch of the suprascapular artery, and the dorsal 
branches of posterior intercostal arteries.

=== PAGE 91 ===
Back
90
Fig. 2.45  Rhomboid muscles and levator scapulae. 
7UDSH]LXV
/DWLVVLPXVGRUVL
5KRPERLGPLQRU
5KRPERLGPDMRU
/HYDWRUVFDSXODH
/LJDPHQWXPQXFKDH

=== PAGE 92 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
91
elevates the scapula and may assist other muscles in rotat­
ing the lateral aspect of the scapula inferiorly.
The levator scapulae is innervated by branches from the 
anterior rami of spinal nerves C3 and C4 and the dorsal 
scapular nerve, and its arterial supply consists of branches 
primarily from the transverse and ascending cervical 
arteries.
Rhomboid minor and rhomboid major
The two rhomboid muscles are inferior to levator scapulae 
(Fig. 2.45 and Table 2.1). Rhomboid minor is superior to 
rhomboid major, and is a small, cylindrical muscle that 
arises from the ligamentum nuchae of the neck and the 
spinous processes of vertebrae CVII and TI and attaches to 
the medial scapular border opposite the root of the spine 
of the scapula.
The larger rhomboid major originates from the 
spinous processes of the upper thoracic vertebrae and 
attaches to the medial scapular border inferior to rhomboid 
minor.
The two rhomboid muscles work together to retract or 
pull the scapula toward the vertebral column. With other 
Latissimus dorsi
Latissimus dorsi is a large, flat triangular muscle that 
begins in the lower portion of the back and tapers as it 
ascends to a narrow tendon that attaches to the humerus 
anteriorly (Figs. 2.42 to 2.45 and Table 2.1). As a result, 
movements associated with this muscle include extension, 
adduction, and medial rotation of the upper limb. The 
latissimus dorsi can also depress the shoulder, preventing 
its upward movement.
The thoracodorsal nerve of the brachial plexus inner­
vates the latissimus dorsi muscle. Associated with this 
nerve is the thoracodorsal artery, which is the primary 
blood supply of the muscle. Additional small arteries come 
from dorsal branches of posterior intercostal and lumbar 
arteries.
Levator scapulae
Levator scapulae is a slender muscle that descends from 
the transverse processes of the upper cervical vertebrae to 
the upper portion of the scapula on its medial border at the 
superior angle (Figs. 2.43 and 2.45 and Table 2.1). It 
Table 2.1  Superficial (appendicular) group of back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Trapezius
Superior nuchal line, external 
occipital protuberance, 
ligamentum nuchae, spinous 
processes of CVII to TXII
Lateral one third of 
clavicle, acromion, spine 
of scapula
Motor—accessory nerve 
[XI]; proprioception—C3 
and C4
Assists in rotating the scapula 
during abduction of humerus 
above horizontal; upper fibers 
elevate, middle fibers adduct, 
and lower fibers depress 
scapula
Latissimus dorsi
Spinous processes of TVII to 
LV and sacrum, iliac crest, ribs 
X to XII
Floor of intertubercular 
sulcus of humerus
Thoracodorsal nerve (C6 
to C8)
Extends, adducts, and medially 
rotates humerus
Levator scapulae
Transverse processes of CI to 
CIV
Upper portion medial 
border of scapula
C3 to C4 and dorsal 
scapular nerve (C4, C5)
Elevates scapula
Rhomboid major
Spinous processes of TII to TV
Medial border of scapula 
between spine and 
inferior angle
Dorsal scapular nerve 
(C4, C5)
Retracts (adducts) and elevates 
scapula
Rhomboid minor
Lower portion of ligamentum 
nuchae, spinous processes of 
CVII and TI
Medial border of scapula 
at spine of scapula
Dorsal scapular nerve 
(C4, C5)
Retracts (adducts) and elevates 
scapula

=== PAGE 93 ===
Back
92
and at times, these muscles have been referred to as the 
respiratory group.
Serratus posterior superior is deep to the rhomboid 
muscles, whereas serratus posterior inferior is deep to 
the latissimus dorsi. Both serratus posterior muscles are 
attached to the vertebral column and associated structures 
medially, and either descend (the fibers of the serratus 
posterior superior) or ascend (the fibers of the serratus 
pos­terior inferior) to attach to the ribs. These two muscles 
therefore elevate and depress the ribs.
The serratus posterior muscles are innervated by seg­
mental branches of anterior rami of intercostal nerves. 
Their vascular supply is provided by a similar segmental 
pattern through the intercostal arteries.
muscles they may also rotate the lateral aspect of the 
scapula inferiorly.
The dorsal scapular nerve, a branch of the brachial 
plexus, innervates both rhomboid muscles (Fig. 2.46).
Intermediate group of back muscles
The muscles in the intermediate group of back muscles 
consist of two thin muscular sheets in the superior and 
inferior regions of the back, immediately deep to the 
muscles in the superficial group (Fig. 2.47 and Table 2.2). 
Fibers from these two serratus posterior muscles (serratus 
posterior superior and serratus posterior inferior) 
pass obliquely outward from the vertebral column to attach 
to the ribs. This positioning suggests a respiratory function, 
Fig. 2.46  Innervation and blood supply of the rhomboid muscles. 
Dorsal scapular nerve
Trapezius
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
Levator scapulae
Superficial branch of transverse cervical artery
Deep branch of transverse 
cervical artery

=== PAGE 94 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
93
Fig. 2.47  Intermediate group of back muscles—serratus posterior muscles. 
Levator scapulae
Serratus posterior superior
Serratus posterior inferior
Posterior layer of
thoracolumbar fascia
Table 2.2  Intermediate (respiratory) group of back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Serratus posterior 
superior
Lower portion of ligamentum 
nuchae, spinous processes of 
CVII to TIII, and supraspinous 
ligaments
Upper border of ribs II to 
V just lateral to their 
angles
Anterior rami of 
upper thoracic nerves 
(T2 to T5)
Elevates ribs II to V
Serratus posterior 
inferior
Spinous processes of TXI to 
LIII and supraspinous 
ligaments
Lower border of ribs IX 
to XII just lateral to their 
angles
Anterior rami of 
lower thoracic nerves 
(T9 to T12)
Depresses ribs IX to XII and 
may prevent lower ribs from 
being elevated when the 
diaphragm contracts

=== PAGE 95 ===
Back
94
Deep group of back muscles
The deep or intrinsic muscles of the back extend from 
the pelvis to the skull and are innervated by segmental 
branches of the posterior rami of spinal nerves. They 
include:
■	 the extensors and rotators of the head and neck—
the splenius capitis and cervicis (spinotransversales 
muscles),
■	 the extensors and rotators of the vertebral column—the 
erector spinae and transversospinales, and
■	 the short segmental muscles—the interspinales and 
intertransversarii.
The vascular supply to this deep group of muscles 
is through branches of the vertebral, deep cervical, occipi­
tal, transverse cervical, posterior intercostal, subcostal, 
lumbar, and lateral sacral arteries.
Thoracolumbar fascia
The thoracolumbar fascia covers the deep muscles of 
the back and trunk (Fig. 2.48). This fascial layer is critical 
to the overall organization and integrity of the region:
■	 Superiorly, it passes anteriorly to the serratus posterior 
muscle and is continuous with deep fascia in the neck.
■	 In the thoracic region, it covers the deep muscles and 
separates them from the muscles in the superficial and 
intermediate groups.
■	 Medially, it attaches to the spinous processes of the 
thoracic vertebrae and, laterally, to the angles of the ribs.
The medial attachments of the latissimus dorsi and 
serratus posterior inferior muscles blend into the thoraco­
lumbar fascia. In the lumbar region, the thoracolumbar 
fascia consists of three layers:
■	 The posterior layer is thick and is attached to the spinous 
processes of the lumbar vertebrae and sacral vertebrae 
and to the supraspinous ligament—from these attach­
ments, it extends laterally to cover the erector spinae.
■	 The middle layer is attached medially to the tips of the 
transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae and inter­
transverse ligaments—inferiorly, it is attached to the 
iliac crest and, superiorly, to the lower border of rib XII.
■	 The anterior layer covers the anterior surface of the 
quadratus lumborum muscle (a muscle of the posterior 
Fig. 2.48  Thoracolumbar fascia and the deep back muscles 
(transverse section). 
Transversus
abdominis muscle
Latissimus dorsi 
muscle
Psoas major muscle
Quadratus
lumborum
muscle
Erector spinae muscles
Thoracolumbar fascia
Anterior layer
Posterior layer
Middle layer
abdominal wall) and is attached medially to the trans­
verse processes of the lumbar vertebrae—inferiorly, it 
is attached to the iliac crest and, superiorly, it forms 
the lateral arcuate ligament for attachment of the 
diaphragm.
The posterior and middle layers of the thoracolumbar 
fascia come together at the lateral margin of the erector 
spinae (Fig. 2.48). At the lateral border of the quadratus 
lumborum, the anterior layer joins them and forms the 
aponeurotic origin for the transversus abdominis muscle 
of the abdominal wall.
Spinotransversales muscles
The two spinotransversales muscles run from the spinous 
processes and ligamentum nuchae upward and laterally 
(Fig. 2.49 and Table 2.3):
■	 The splenius capitis is a broad muscle attached to the 
occipital bone and mastoid process of the temporal 
bone.
■	 The splenius cervicis is a narrow muscle attached to the 
transverse processes of the upper cervical vertebrae.
Together the spinotransversales muscles draw the head 
backward, extending the neck. Individually, each muscle 
rotates the head to one side—the same side as the contract­
ing muscle.

=== PAGE 96 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
95
Levator scapulae
Splenius capitis 
Ligamentum nuchae
Splenius cervicis
Fig. 2.49  Deep group of back muscles—spinotransversales muscles (splenius capitis and splenius cervicis). 
Erector spinae muscles
The erector spinae is the largest group of intrinsic back 
muscles. The muscles lie posterolaterally to the vertebral 
column between the spinous processes medially and 
the angles of the ribs laterally. They are covered in the 
thoracic and lumbar regions by thoracolumbar fascia and 
the serratus posterior inferior, rhomboid, and splenius 
muscles. The mass arises from a broad, thick tendon 
attached to the sacrum, the spinous processes of the 
lumbar and lower thoracic vertebrae, and the iliac crest 
(Fig. 2.50 and Table 2.4). It divides in the upper lumbar 
region into three vertical columns of muscle, each of 
which is further subdivided regionally (lumborum, thora­
cis, cervicis, and capitis), depending on where the muscles 
attach superiorly.
Table 2.3  Spinotransversales muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Splenius capitis
Lower half of ligamentum 
nuchae, spinous processes 
of CVII to TIV
Mastoid process, skull 
below lateral one third of 
superior nuchal line
Posterior rami of middle 
cervical nerves
Together—draw head 
backward, extending neck; 
individually—draw and rotate 
head to one side (turn face to 
same side)
Splenius cervicis
Spinous processes of TIII to 
TVI
Transverse processes of CI 
to CIII
Posterior rami of lower 
cervical nerves
Together—extend neck; 
individually—draw and rotate 
head to one side (turn face to 
same side)

=== PAGE 97 ===
Back
96
Fig. 2.50  Deep group of back muscles—erector spinae muscles. 
Spinous process of CVII
Iliac crest
Splenius capitis
Longissimus capitis 
Ligamentum nuchae
Longissimus thoracis
Longissimus cervicis
Spinalis thoracis
Spinalis
Iliocostalis lumborum 
Iliocostalis thoracis
Iliocostalis cervicis
Iliocostalis
Longissimus

=== PAGE 98 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
97
Table 2.4  Erector spinae group of back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Iliocostalis lumborum
Sacrum, spinous processes of lumbar and lower two 
thoracic vertebrae and their supraspinous ligaments, 
and the iliac crest
Angles of the lower six or seven ribs
Iliocostalis thoracis
Angles of the lower six ribs
Angles of the upper six ribs and the transverse process 
of CVII
Iliocostalis cervicis
Angles of ribs III to VI
Transverse processes of CIV to CVI
Longissimus thoracis
Blends with iliocostalis in lumbar region and is 
attached to transverse processes of lumbar vertebrae
Transverse processes of all thoracic vertebrae and just 
lateral to the tubercles of the lower nine or ten ribs
Longissimus cervicis
Transverse processes of upper four or five thoracic 
vertebrae
Transverse processes of CII to CVI
Longissimus capitis
Transverse processes of upper four or five thoracic 
vertebrae and articular processes of lower three or 
four cervical vertebrae
Posterior margin of the mastoid process
Spinalis thoracis
Spinous processes of TX or TXI to LII
Spinous processes of TI to TVIII (varies)
Spinalis cervicis
Lower part of ligamentum nuchae and spinous process 
of CVII (sometimes TI to TII)
Spinous process of CII (axis)
Spinalis capitis
Usually blends with semispinalis capitis
With semispinalis capitis
■	 The outer or most laterally placed column of the erector 
spinae muscles is the iliocostalis, which is associated 
with the costal elements and passes from the common 
tendon of origin to multiple insertions into the angles 
of the ribs and the transverse processes of the lower 
cervical vertebrae.
■	 The middle or intermediate column is the longissimus, 
which is the largest of the erector spinae subdivision 
extending from the common tendon of origin to the 
base of the skull. Throughout this vast expanse, the 
lateral positioning of the longissimus muscle is in 
the area of the transverse processes of the various 
vertebrae.
■	 The most medial muscle column is the spinalis, which 
is the smallest of the subdivisions and interconnects the 
spinous processes of adjacent vertebrae. The spinalis is 
most constant in the thoracic region and is generally 
absent in the cervical region. It is associated with a 
deeper muscle (the semispinalis capitis) as the erector 
spinae group approaches the skull.
The muscles in the erector spinae group are the primary 
extensors of the vertebral column and head. Acting bilat­
erally, they straighten the back, returning it to the upright 
position from a flexed position, and pull the head posteriorly. 
They also participate in controlling vertebral column 
flexion by contracting and relaxing in a coordinated 
fashion. Acting unilaterally, they bend the vertebral 
column laterally. In addition, unilateral contractions of 
muscles attached to the head turn the head to the actively 
contracting side.
Transversospinales muscles
The transversospinales muscles run obliquely upward and 
medially from transverse processes to spinous processes, 
filling the groove between these two vertebral projections 
(Fig. 2.51 and Table 2.5). They are deep to the erector 
spinae and consist of three major subgroups—the semispi­
nalis, multifidus, and rotatores muscles.
■	 The semispinalis muscles are the most superficial col­
lection of muscle fibers in the transversospinales group. 
These muscles begin in the lower thoracic region and 
end by attaching to the skull, crossing between four 
and six vertebrae from their point of origin to point of 
attachment. Semispinalis muscles are found in the 
thoracic and cervical regions, and attach to the occipital 
bone at the base of the skull.
■	 Deep to the semispinalis is the second group of muscles, 
the multifidus. Muscles in this group span the length 
of the vertebral column, passing from a lateral point of 
origin upward and medially to attach to spinous proc­
esses and spanning between two and four vertebrae. The 
multifidus muscles are present throughout the length of 
the vertebral column but are best developed in the 
lumbar region.
■	 The small rotatores muscles are the deepest of the 
transversospinales group. They are present throughout 
the length of the vertebral column but are best devel­
oped in the thoracic region. Their fibers pass upward 
and medially from transverse processes to spinous 
processes crossing two vertebrae (long rotators) or 
attaching to an adjacent vertebra (short rotators).

=== PAGE 99 ===
Back
98
Fig. 2.51  Deep group of back muscles—transversospinales and segmental muscles. 
Spinous process of CVII
Obliquus capitis inferior
Obliquus capitis superior
Rectus capitis posterior minor
Rectus capitis posterior major
Semispinalis thoracis
Intertransversarius
Erector spinae
Rotatores thoracis
(short, long)
Levatores costarum
(short, long)
Semispinalis capitis
Multifidus

=== PAGE 100 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Back Musculature
2
99
Table 2.5  Transversospinales group of back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Semispinalis thoracis
Transverse processes of TVI to TX
Spinous processes of upper four thoracic and 
lower two cervical vertebrae
Semispinalis cervicis
Transverse processes of upper five or six thoracic vertebrae
Spinous processes of CII (axis) to CV
Semispinalis capitis
Transverse processes of TI to TVI (or TVII) and CVII and 
articular processes of CIV to CVI
Medial area between the superior and inferior 
nuchal lines of occipital bone
Multifidus
Sacrum, origin of erector spinae, posterior superior iliac 
spine, mammillary processes of lumbar vertebrae, transverse 
processes of thoracic vertebrae, and articular processes of 
lower four cervical vertebrae
Base of spinous processes of all vertebrae from 
LV to CII (axis)
Rotatores lumborum
Transverse processes of lumbar vertebrae
Spinous processes of lumbar vertebrae
Rotatores thoracis
Transverse processes of thoracic vertebrae
Spinous processes of thoracic vertebrae
Rotatores cervicis
Articular processes of cervical vertebrae
Spinous processes of cervical vertebrae
When muscles in the transversospinales group contract 
bilaterally, they extend the vertebral column, an action 
similar to that of the erector spinae group. However, when 
muscles on only one side contract, they pull the spinous 
processes toward the transverse processes on that side, 
causing the trunk to turn or rotate in the opposite 
direction.
One muscle in the transversospinales group, the semi­
spinalis capitis, has a unique action because it attaches 
to the skull. Contracting bilaterally, this muscle pulls the 
head posteriorly, whereas unilateral contraction pulls the 
head posteriorly and turns it, causing the chin to move 
superiorly and turn toward the side of the contracting 
muscle. These actions are similar to those of the upper 
erector spinae.
Segmental muscles
The two groups of segmental muscles (Fig. 2.51 and Table 
2.6) are deeply placed in the back and innervated by pos­
terior rami of spinal nerves.
■	 The first group of segmental muscles are the levatores 
costarum muscles, which arise from the transverse 
processes of vertebrae CVII and TI to TXI. They have an 
oblique lateral and downward direction and insert into 
the rib below the vertebra of origin in the area of the 
tubercle. Contraction elevates the ribs.
■	 The second group of segmental muscles are the true 
segmental muscles of the back—the interspinales, 
which pass between adjacent spinous processes, and the 
intertransversarii, which pass between adjacent 
transverse processes. These postural muscles stabilize 
adjoining vertebrae during movements of the vertebral 
column to allow more effective action of the large 
muscle groups.
Suboccipital muscles
A small group of deep muscles in the upper cervical region 
at the base of the occipital bone move the head. They 
connect vertebra CI (the atlas) to vertebra CII (the axis) and 
connect both vertebrae to the base of the skull. Because 
of their location they are sometimes referred to as suboc­
cipital muscles (Figs. 2.51 and 2.52 and Table 2.7). They 
include, on each side:
Table 2.6  Segmental back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Function
Levatores costarum
Short paired muscles arising from transverse 
processes of CVII to TXI
The rib below vertebra of origin 
near tubercle
Contraction elevates rib
Interspinales
Short paired muscles attached to the 
spinous processes of contiguous vertebrae, 
one on each side of the interspinous 
ligament
Postural muscles that stabilize 
adjoining vertebrae during 
movements of vertebral column
Intertransversarii
Small muscles between the transverse 
processes of contiguous vertebrae
Postural muscles that stabilize 
adjoining vertebrae during 
movements of vertebral column

=== PAGE 101 ===
Back
100
Fig. 2.52  Deep group of back muscles—suboccipital muscles. This also shows the borders of the suboccipital triangle. 
Spinous process of CII
Posterior ramus of C1
Obliquus capitis superior 
Rectus capitis posterior minor
Obliquus capitis inferior
Rectus capitis posterior major
Splenius capitis
Splenius capitis
Longissimus capitis
Semispinalis cervicis
Semispinalis capitis
Semispinalis capitis
Vertebral artery
Table 2.7  Suboccipital group of back muscles
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Rectus capitis posterior 
major
Spinous process of 
axis (CII)
Lateral portion of occipital 
bone below inferior nuchal 
line
Posterior ramus of C1
Extension of head; rotation of 
face to same side as muscle
Rectus capitis posterior 
minor
Posterior tubercle of 
atlas (CI)
Medial portion of occipital 
bone below inferior nuchal 
line
Posterior ramus of C1
Extension of head
Obliquus capitis superior
Transverse process of 
atlas (CI)
Occipital bone between 
superior and inferior nuchal 
lines
Posterior ramus of C1
Extension of head and bends it 
to same side
Obliquus capitis inferior
Spinous process of 
axis (CII)
Transverse process of atlas 
(CI)
Posterior ramus of C1
Rotation of face to same side
■	 rectus capitis posterior major,
■	 rectus capitis posterior minor,
■	 obliquus capitis inferior, and
■	 obliquus capitis superior.
Contraction of the suboccipital muscles extends and 
rotates the head at the atlanto-occipital and atlanto-axial 
joints, respectively.
The suboccipital muscles are innervated by the posterior 
ramus of the first cervical nerve, which enters the area 
between the vertebral artery and the posterior arch of the 
atlas (Fig. 2.52). The vascular supply to the muscles in 
this area is from branches of the vertebral and occipital 
arteries.
The suboccipital muscles form the boundaries of the 
suboccipital triangle, an area that contains several 
important structures (Fig. 2.52):
■	 The rectus capitis posterior major muscle forms the 
medial border of the triangle.
■	 The obliquus capitis superior muscle forms the lateral 
border.
■	 The obliquus capitis inferior muscle forms the inferior 
border.

=== PAGE 102 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
101
The contents of the suboccipital triangle include:
■	 posterior ramus of CI,
■	 vertebral artery, and
■	 veins
In the clinic
Nerve injuries affecting superficial back muscles
Weakness in the trapezius, caused by an interruption of 
the accessory nerve [XI], may appear as drooping of the 
shoulder, inability to raise the arm above the head 
because of impaired rotation of the scapula, or weakness 
in attempting to raise the shoulder (i.e., shrug the 
shoulder against resistance).
A weakness in, or an inability to use, the latissimus 
dorsi, resulting from an injury to the thoracodorsal nerve, 
diminishes the capacity to pull the body upward while 
climbing or doing a pull-up.
An injury to the dorsal scapular nerve, which innervates 
the rhomboids, may result in a lateral shift in the position 
of the scapula on the affected side (i.e., the normal 
position of the scapula is lost because of the affected 
muscle’s inability to prevent antagonistic muscles from 
pulling the scapula laterally).
Fig. 2.53  Spinal cord. 
End of spinal
cord LI–LII
Conus medullaris
Inferior part of
arachnoid mater
End of subarachnoid
space SII
Cervical
enlargement
(of spinal cord)
Lumbosacral
enlargement
(of spinal cord)
Filum
terminale
Pial part
Dural part
Pedicles of
vertebrae
SPINAL CORD
The spinal cord extends from the foramen magnum to 
approximately the level of the disc between vertebrae LI 
and LII in adults, although it can end as high as vertebra 
TXII or as low as the disc between vertebrae LII and LIII 
(Fig. 2.53). In neonates, the spinal cord extends approxi­
mately to vertebra LIII but can reach as low as vertebra LIV. 
The distal end of the cord (the conus medullaris) is cone 
shaped. A fine filament of connective tissue (the pial part 
of the filum terminale) continues inferiorly from the apex 
of the conus medullaris.
The spinal cord is not uniform in diameter along its 
length. It has two major swellings or enlargements in 
regions associated with the origin of spinal nerves that 
innervate the upper and lower limbs. A cervical enlarge­
ment occurs in the region associated with the origins of 
spinal nerves C5 to T1, which innervate the upper limbs. 
A lumbosacral enlargement occurs in the region associ­
ated with the origins of spinal nerves L1 to S3, which 
innervate the lower limbs.
The external surface of the spinal cord is marked by a 
number of fissures and sulci (Fig. 2.54):
■	 The anterior median fissure extends the length of the 
anterior surface.

=== PAGE 103 ===
Back
102
■	 The posterior median sulcus extends along the pos­
terior surface.
■	 The posterolateral sulcus on each side of the poste­
rior surface marks where the posterior rootlets of spinal 
nerves enter the cord.
Internally, the cord has a small central canal surrounded 
by gray and white matter:
■	 The gray matter is rich in nerve cell bodies, which form 
longitudinal columns along the cord, and in cross 
section these columns form a characteristic H-shaped 
appearance in the central regions of the cord.
■	 The white matter surrounds the gray matter and is rich 
in nerve cell processes, which form large bundles or 
tracts that ascend and descend in the cord to other 
spinal cord levels or carry information to and from 
the brain.
Vasculature
Arteries
The arterial supply to the spinal cord comes from two 
sources (Fig. 2.55). It consists of:
Fig. 2.54  Features of the spinal cord. 
Gray matter
White matter
Anterior
median fissure
Central canal
Posterior median
sulcus
Posterolateral
sulcus
Anterior median fissure
Posterior spinal artery
A
Deep cervical artery
Costocervical trunk
Thyrocervical trunk
Subclavian artery
Posterior intercostal
artery
Segmental
spinal artery
Artery of Adamkiewicz
(branch from
segmental
spinal artery)
Ascending cervical
artery
Vertebral artery
Segmental medullary
arteries
Anterior spinal artery
Segmental medullary
arteries (branch from
segmental spinal
artery)
Lateral sacral artery
Segmental
spinal artery
Fig. 2.55  Arteries that supply the spinal cord. A. Anterior view of 
spinal cord (not all segmental spinal arteries are shown).

=== PAGE 104 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
103
B
Posterior spinal arteries
Anterior radicular artery
Anterior radicular artery
Posterior radicular artery
Posterior radicular artery
Segmental medullary artery
Segmental
medullary artery
Anterior spinal artery
Posterior branch
of right posterior
intercostal artery
Left posterior
intercostal artery
Segmental spinal artery
Posterior branch
of left posterior
intercostal artery
Segmental
spinal artery
Segmental spinal artery
Aorta
Fig. 2.55, cont’d  B. Segmental supply of spinal cord. 
■	 longitudinally oriented vessels, arising superior to the 
cervical portion of the cord, which descend on the 
surface of the cord; and
■	 feeder arteries that enter the vertebral canal through 
the intervertebral foramina at every level; these feeder 
vessels, or segmental spinal arteries, arise predomi­
nantly from the vertebral and deep cervical arteries in 
the neck, the posterior intercostal arteries in the thorax, 
and the lumbar arteries in the abdomen.
After entering an intervertebral foramen, the segmental 
spinal arteries give rise to anterior and posterior radicu­
lar arteries (Fig. 2.55). This occurs at every vertebral 
level. The radicular arteries follow, and supply, the anterior 
and posterior roots. At various vertebral levels, the seg­
mental spinal arteries also give off segmental medul­
lary arteries (Fig. 2.55). These vessels pass directly to the 
longitudinally oriented vessels, reinforcing these.
The longitudinal vessels consist of:
■	 a single anterior spinal artery, which originates 
within the cranial cavity as the union of two vessels that 
arise from the vertebral arteries—the resulting single 
anterior spinal artery passes inferiorly, approximately 
parallel to the anterior median fissure, along the surface 
of the spinal cord; and
■	 two posterior spinal arteries, which also originate in 
the cranial cavity, usually arising directly from a termi­
nal branch of each vertebral artery (the posterior infe­
rior cerebellar artery)—the right and left posterior 
spinal arteries descend along the spinal cord, each as 
two branches that bracket the posterolateral sulcus and 
the connection of posterior roots with the spinal cord.
The anterior and posterior spinal arteries are reinforced 
along their length by eight to ten segmental medullary 

=== PAGE 105 ===
Back
104
■	 One midline channel parallels the anterior median 
fissure.
■	 One midline channel passes along the posterior median 
sulcus.
These longitudinal channels drain into an extensive 
internal vertebral plexus in the extradural (epidural) 
space of the vertebral canal, which then drains into seg­
mentally arranged vessels that connect with major sys­
temic veins, such as the azygos system in the thorax. The 
internal vertebral plexus also communicates with intra­
cranial veins.
arteries (Fig. 2.55). The largest of these is the arteria 
radicularis magna or the artery of  Adamkiewicz 
(Fig. 2.55). This vessel arises in the lower thoracic or upper 
lumbar region, usually on the left side, and reinforces the 
arterial supply to the lower portion of the spinal cord, 
including the lumbar enlargement.
Veins
Veins that drain the spinal cord form a number of longitu­
dinal channels (Fig. 2.56):
■	 Two pairs of veins on each side bracket the connections 
of the posterior and anterior roots to the cord.
Fig. 2.56  Veins that drain the spinal cord. 
Internal vertebral plexus
Extradural fat
Anterior spinal vein
Dura mater
Posterior spinal vein

=== PAGE 106 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
105
In the clinic
Discitis
The intervertebral discs are poorly vascularized; however, 
infection within the bloodstream can spread to the discs 
from the terminal branches of the spinal arteries within 
the vertebral body endplates, which lie immediately 
adjacent to the discs (Fig. 2.57). Common sources of 
infection include the lungs and urinary tract.
Fig. 2.57  MRI of the spine. There is discitis of the T10-T11 
intervertebral disc with destruction of the adjacent endplates. 
There is also a prevertebral abscess and an epidural abscess, 
which impinges the cord. 
In the clinic
Paraplegia and tetraplegia
An injury to the spinal cord in the cervical portion of the 
vertebral column can lead to varying degrees of impairment 
of sensory and motor function (paralysis) in all 4 limbs, 
termed quadriplegia or tetraplegia. An injury in upper levels 
of the cervical vertebral column can result in death because 
of loss of innervation to the diaphragm. An injury to the 
spinal cord below the level of TI can lead to varying degrees 
of impairment in motor and sensory function (paralysis) in 
the lower limbs, termed paraplegia.
In the clinic
Fractures of the atlas and axis
Fractures of vertebra CI (the atlas) and vertebra CII (the axis) 
can potentially lead to the worst types of spinal cord injury 
including death and paralysis due to injury of the brainstem, 
which contains the cardiac and respiratory centers. The atlas 
is a closed ring with no vertebral body. Axial-loading 
injuries, such as hitting the head while diving into shallow 
water or hitting the head on the roof of a car in a motor 
vehicle accident, can cause a “burst” type of fracture, where 
the ring breaks at more than one site (Fig. 2.58). The British 
neurosurgeon, Geoffrey Jefferson, first described this 
fracture pattern in 1920, so these types of fractures are often 
called Jefferson fractures.
Fractures of the axis usually occur due to severe 
hyperextension and flexion, which can result in fracture of 
the tip of the dens, base of the dens, or through the body 
of the atlas. In judicial hangings, there is hyperextension 
and distraction injury causing fracture through the atlas 
pedicles and spondylolisthesis of C2 on C3. This type of 
fracture is often called a hangman’s fracture.
In many cases of upper neck injuries, even in the 
absence of fractures to the atlas or axis, there may be 
injury to the atlanto-axial ligaments, which can render the 
neck unstable and pose severe risk to the brainstem and 
upper spinal cord.
Fig. 2.58  CT at the level of CI demonstrates two breaks in 
the closed ring of the atlas following an axial-loading injury. 

=== PAGE 107 ===
Back
106
Meninges
Spinal dura mater
The spinal dura mater is the outermost meningeal mem­
brane and is separated from the bones forming the vertebral 
canal by an extradural space (Fig. 2.59). Superiorly, it is 
continuous with the inner meningeal layer of cranial dura 
mater at the foramen magnum of the skull. Inferiorly, the 
dural sac dramatically narrows at the level of the lower 
border of vertebra SII and forms an investing sheath for the 
pial part of the filum terminale of the spinal cord. This 
terminal cord-like extension of dura mater (the dural part 
of the filum terminale) attaches to the posterior surface of 
the vertebral bodies of the coccyx.
As spinal nerves and their roots pass laterally, they are 
surrounded by tubular sleeves of dura mater, which merge 
with and become part of the outer covering (epineurium) 
of the nerves.
Arachnoid mater
The arachnoid mater is a thin delicate membrane 
against, but not adherent to, the deep surface of the dura 
Fig. 2.59  Meninges. 
Subarachnoid space
Recurrent meningeal nerves
Anterior spinal artery
Denticulate ligament
Pia mater
Arachnoid mater
Dura mater
Posterior spinal artery
mater (Fig. 2.59). It is separated from the pia mater by the 
subarachnoid space. The arachnoid mater ends at the level 
of vertebra SII (see Fig. 2.53).
Subarachnoid space
The subarachnoid space between the arachnoid and pia 
mater contains CSF (Fig. 2.59). The subarachnoid space 
around the spinal cord is continuous at the foramen 
magnum with the subarachnoid space surrounding the 
brain. Inferiorly, the subarachnoid space terminates at 
approximately the level of the lower border of vertebra SII 
(see Fig. 2.53).
Delicate strands of tissue (arachnoid trabeculae) are 
continuous with the arachnoid mater on one side and the 
pia mater on the other; they span the subarachnoid space 
and interconnect the two adjacent membranes. Large 
blood vessels are suspended in the subarachnoid space by 
similar strands of material, which expand over the vessels 
to form a continuous external coat.
The subarachnoid space extends farther inferiorly than 
the spinal cord. The spinal cord ends at approximately 
the disc between vertebrae LI and LII, whereas the 

=== PAGE 108 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
107
Arrangement of structures in 
the vertebral canal
The vertebral canal is bordered:
■	 anteriorly by the bodies of the vertebrae, intervertebral 
discs, and posterior longitudinal ligament (Fig. 2.60);
■	 laterally, on each side by the pedicles and intervertebral 
foramina; and
■	 posteriorly by the laminae and ligamenta flava, and in 
the median plane the roots of the interspinous ligaments 
and vertebral spinous processes.
Between the walls of the vertebral canal and the dural 
sac is an extradural space containing a vertebral plexus of 
veins embedded in fatty connective tissue.
The vertebral spinous processes can be palpated through 
the skin in the midline in thoracic and lumbar regions 
of the back. Between the skin and spinous processes is a 
layer of superficial fascia. In lumbar regions, the adjacent 
spinous processes and the associated laminae on either side 
of the midline do not overlap, resulting in gaps between 
adjacent vertebral arches.
When carrying out a lumbar puncture (spinal tap), the 
needle passes between adjacent vertebral spinous processes, 
through the supraspinous and interspinous ligaments, and 
enters the extradural space. The needle continues through 
the dura and arachnoid mater and enters the subarachnoid 
space, which contains CSF.
subarachnoid space extends to approximately the lower 
border of vertebra SII (see Fig. 2.53). The subarachnoid 
space is largest in the region inferior to the terminal end of 
the spinal cord, where it surrounds the cauda equina. As 
a consequence, CSF can be withdrawn from the subarach­
noid space in the lower lumbar region without endanger­
ing the spinal cord.
Pia mater
The spinal pia mater is a vascular membrane that firmly 
adheres to the surface of the spinal cord (Fig. 2.59). It 
extends into the anterior median fissure and reflects as 
sleeve-like coatings onto posterior and anterior rootlets 
and roots as they cross the subarachnoid space. As the 
roots exit the space, the sleeve-like coatings reflect onto the 
arachnoid mater.
On each side of the spinal cord, a longitudinally oriented 
sheet of pia mater (the denticulate ligament) extends 
laterally from the cord toward the arachnoid and dura 
mater (Fig. 2.59).
■	 Medially, each denticulate ligament is attached to the 
spinal cord in a plane that lies between the origins of the 
posterior and anterior rootlets.
■	 Laterally, each denticulate ligament forms a series of 
triangular extensions along its free border, with the 
apex of each extension being anchored through the 
arachnoid mater to the dura mater.
The lateral attachments of the denticulate ligaments 
generally occur between the exit points of adjacent poste­
rior and anterior rootlets. The ligaments function to posi­
tion the spinal cord in the center of the subarachnoid 
space.

=== PAGE 109 ===
Back
108
Fig. 2.60  Arrangement of structures in the vertebral canal and the back (lumbar region). 
Crura of diaphragm
Aorta
Psoas
Dura
Quadratus lumborum
Internal vertebral plexus of veins
in extradural space
Erector spinae 
muscles
Ligamenta flava
Supraspinous ligament
Interspinous ligament
Lumbar artery
Vein
Cauda equina
Skin
Vertebra
Intervertebral disc
Intervertebral foramen
Lamina
Pedicle
Posterior longitudinal ligament

=== PAGE 110 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
109
In the clinic
Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid tap
A lumbar tap (puncture) is carried out to obtain a sample of 
CSF for examination. In addition, passage of a needle or 
conduit into the subarachnoid space (CSF space) is used to 
inject antibiotics, chemotherapeutic agents, and anesthetics.
The lumbar region is an ideal site to access the 
subarachnoid space because the spinal cord terminates 
around the level of the disc between vertebrae LI and LII in 
the adult. The subarachnoid space extends to the region of 
the lower border of the SII vertebra. There is therefore a 
large CSF-filled space containing lumbar and sacral nerve 
roots but no spinal cord.
Depending on the clinician’s preference, the patient is 
placed in the lateral or prone position. A needle is passed 
in the midline in between the spinous processes into the 
extradural space. Further advancement punctures the 
dura and arachnoid mater to enter the subarachnoid 
space. Most needles push the roots away from the tip 
without causing the patient any symptoms. Once the 
needle is in the subarachnoid space, fluid can be 
aspirated. In some situations, it is important to measure CSF 
pressure.
Local anesthetics can be injected into the extradural space 
or the subarachnoid space to anesthetize the sacral and 
lumbar nerve roots. Such anesthesia is useful for operations 
on the pelvis and the legs, which can then be carried out 
without the need for general anesthesia. When procedures 
are carried out, the patient must be in the erect position and 
not lying on his or her side or in the head-down position. If 
a patient lies on his or her side, the anesthesia is likely to be 
unilateral. If the patient is placed in the head-down position, 
the anesthetic can pass cranially and potentially depress 
respiration.
In some instances, anesthesiologists choose to carry out 
extradural anesthesia. A needle is placed through the skin, 
supraspinous ligament, interspinous ligament, and ligamenta 
flava into the areolar tissue and fat around the dura mater. 
Anesthetic agent is introduced and diffuses around the 
vertebral canal to anesthetize the exiting nerve roots and 
diffuse into the subarachnoid space.
Spinal nerves
Each spinal nerve is connected to the spinal cord by poste­
rior and anterior roots (Fig. 2.61):
■	 The posterior root contains the processes of sensory 
neurons carrying information to the CNS—the cell 
bodies of the sensory neurons, which are derived 
embryologically from neural crest cells, are clustered in 
a spinal ganglion at the distal end of the posterior 
root, usually in the intervertebral foramen.
■	 The anterior root contains motor nerve fibers, which 
carry signals away from the CNS—the cell bodies of the 
primary motor neurons are in anterior regions of the 
spinal cord.
Medially, the posterior and anterior roots divide into 
rootlets, which attach to the spinal cord.
A spinal segment is the area of the spinal cord that 
gives rise to the posterior and anterior rootlets, which 
will form a single pair of spinal nerves. Laterally, the pos­
terior and anterior roots on each side join to form a spinal 
nerve.
Each spinal nerve divides, as it emerges from an 
intervertebral foramen, into two major branches: a small 
posterior ramus and a much larger anterior ramus 
(Fig. 2.61):
■	 The posterior rami innervate only intrinsic back 
muscles (the epaxial muscles) and an associated narrow 
strip of skin on the back.
■	 The anterior rami innervate most other skeletal 
muscles (the hypaxial muscles) of the body, including 
those of the limbs and trunk, and most remaining areas 
of the skin, except for certain regions of the head.

=== PAGE 111 ===
Back
110
Fig. 2.61  Basic organization of a spinal nerve. 
Somatic motor
nerve fiber
Somatic motor
nerve fiber
Posterior root
Posterior rootlets
Spinal ganglion
Posterior ramus
Spinal nerve
Anterior ramus
Anterior root
Somatic sensory
nerve ending in skin
Somatic sensory
nerve ending in skin
Anterior rootlets
Intrinsic back muscles
All muscles except intrinsic
back muscles
Near the point of division into anterior and posterior 
rami, each spinal nerve gives rise to two to four small 
recurrent meningeal (sinuvertebral) nerves (see Fig. 2.59). 
These nerves reenter the intervertebral foramen to supply 
dura, ligaments, intervertebral discs, and blood vessels.
All major somatic plexuses (cervical, brachial, lumbar, 
and sacral) are formed by anterior rami.
Because the spinal cord is much shorter than the verte­
bral column, the roots of spinal nerves become longer and 
pass more obliquely from the cervical to coccygeal regions 
of the vertebral canal (Fig. 2.62).
In adults, the spinal cord terminates at a level approxi­
mately between vertebrae LI and LII, but this can range 
between vertebra TXII and the disc between vertebrae LII 
and LIII. Consequently, posterior and anterior roots forming 
spinal nerves emerging between vertebrae in the lower 
regions of the vertebral column are connected to the spinal 
cord at higher vertebral levels.
Below the end of the spinal cord, the posterior and 
anterior roots of lumbar, sacral, and coccygeal nerves pass 
inferiorly to reach their exit points from the vertebral canal. 
This terminal cluster of roots is the cauda equina.

=== PAGE 112 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
111
Fig. 2.62  Course of spinal nerves in the vertebral canal. 
1
12
11
10
1
1
2
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
9
5
6
7
8
4
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1
2
3
C8
T1
T2
T3
T4
T5
T6
T7
T8
T9
T10
T11
T12
L1
L2
L3
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
S5
Co
C7
C6
C5
C4
Cervical enlargement
(of spinal cord)
C2
C3
C1
Lumbosacral enlargement
(of spinal cord)
Cauda equina
Pedicles of vertebrae
Spinal ganglion

=== PAGE 113 ===
Back
112
Fig. 2.63  Nomenclature of the spinal nerves. 
Nerve C1 emerges between
skull and CI vertebra
Nerve C8 emerges inferior to
pedicle of CVII vertebra
Nerves C2 to C7 emerge
superior to pedicles
Nerves T1 to Co emerge
inferior to pedicles of
their respective vertebrae
C2
C1
C3
C4
C5
C6
C7
C8
T1
CI
CVII
TI
Pedicle
Transition in
nomenclature
of nerves
T2
Nomenclature of spinal nerves
There are approximately 31 pairs of spinal nerves (Fig. 
2.62), named according to their position with respect to 
associated vertebrae:
■	 eight cervical nerves—C1 to C8,
■	 twelve thoracic nerves—T1 to T12,
■	 five lumbar nerves—L1 to L5,
■	 five sacral nerves—S1 to S5,
■	 one coccygeal nerve—Co.
The first cervical nerve (C1) emerges from the vertebral 
canal between the skull and vertebra CI (Fig. 2.63). There­
fore cervical nerves C2 to C7 also emerge from the vertebral 
canal above their respective vertebrae. Because there are 
only seven cervical vertebrae, C8 emerges between verte­
brae CVII and TI. As a consequence, all remaining spinal 
nerves, beginning with T1, emerge from the vertebral 
canal below their respective vertebrae.
In the clinic
Herpes zoster
Herpes zoster is the virus that produces chickenpox in 
children. In some patients the virus remains dormant 
in the cells of the spinal ganglia. Under certain 
circumstances, the virus becomes activated and travels 
along the neuronal bundles to the areas supplied by that 
nerve (the dermatome). A rash ensues, which is 
characteristically exquisitely painful. Importantly, this 
typical dermatomal distribution is characteristic of 
this disorder.

=== PAGE 114 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Spinal Cord
2
113
In the clinic
Back pain—alternative explanations
Back pain is an extremely common condition affecting 
almost all individuals at some stage during their life. It is of 
key clinical importance to identify whether the back pain 
relates to the vertebral column and its attachments or relates 
to other structures.
The failure to consider other potential structures that may 
produce back pain can lead to significant mortality and 
morbidity. Pain may refer to the back from a number of 
organs situated in the retroperitoneum. Pancreatic pain in 
particular refers to the back and may be associated with 
pancreatic cancer and pancreatitis. Renal pain, which may be 
produced by stones in the renal collecting system or renal 
tumors, also typically refers to the back. More often than not 
this is usually unilateral; however, it can produce central 
posterior back pain. Enlarged lymph nodes in the pre- and 
para-aortic region may produce central posterior back pain 
and may be a sign of solid tumor malignancy, infection, or 
Hodgkin’s lymphoma. An enlarging abdominal aorta 
(abdominal aortic aneurysm) may cause back pain as it 
enlarges without rupture. Therefore it is critical to think of 
this structure as a potential cause of back pain, because 
treatment will be lifesaving. Moreover, a ruptured abdominal 
aortic aneurysm may also cause acute back pain in the first 
instance.
In all patients back pain requires careful assessment not 
only of the vertebral column but also of the chest and 
abdomen in order not to miss other important anatomical 
structures that may produce signs and symptoms radiating 
to the back.

=== PAGE 115 ===
Back
114
Surface anatomy
Back surface anatomy
Surface features of the back are used to locate muscle 
groups for testing peripheral nerves, to determine regions 
of the vertebral column, and to estimate the approximate 
position of the inferior end of the spinal cord. They are also 
used to locate organs that occur posteriorly in the thorax 
and abdomen.
Fig. 2.64  Normal appearance of the back. A. In women. B. In men. 
A
B
Absence of lateral curvatures
When viewed from behind, the normal vertebral column 
has no lateral curvatures. The vertical skin furrow between 
muscle masses on either side of the midline is straight 
(Fig. 2.64).

=== PAGE 116 ===
2
115
Surface Anatomy  •  Useful Nonvertebral Skeletal Landmarks
Fig. 2.65  Normal curvatures of the vertebral column. 
Lumbar region
secondary curvature
Thoracic region
primary curvature
Sacral/coccygeal region
primary curvature
Cervical region
secondary curvature
Primary and secondary curvatures 
in the sagittal plane
When viewed from the side, the normal vertebral column 
has primary curvatures in the thoracic and sacral/
coccygeal regions and secondary curvatures in the cervical 
and lumbar regions (Fig. 2.65). The primary curvatures 
are concave anteriorly. The secondary curvatures are 
concave posteriorly.
Useful nonvertebral skeletal landmarks
A number of readily palpable bony features provide useful 
landmarks for defining muscles and for locating structures 
associated with the vertebral column. Among these fea­
tures are the external occipital protuberance, the scapula, 
and the iliac crest (Fig. 2.66).
The external occipital protuberance is palpable in the 
midline at the back of the head just superior to the 
hairline.
The spine, medial border, and inferior angle of the 
scapula are often visible and are easily palpable.
The iliac crest is palpable along its entire length, from 
the anterior superior iliac spine at the lower lateral margin 
of the anterior abdominal wall to the posterior superior 
iliac spine near the base of the back. The position of the 
posterior superior iliac spine is often visible as a “sacral 
dimple” just lateral to the midline.

=== PAGE 117 ===
Back
116
Fig. 2.66  Back of a woman with major palpable bony landmarks indicated. 
Spine of scapula
Inferior angle of scapula
Medial border of scapula
Position of external
occipital protuberance
Posterior superior iliac spine
Iliac crest

=== PAGE 118 ===
2
117
Surface Anatomy  •  How To Identify Specific Vertebral Spinous Processes
Fig. 2.67  The back with the positions of vertebral spinous processes and associated structures indicated. A. In a man. B. In a woman with neck 
flexed. The prominent CVII and TI vertebral spinous processes are labeled. C. In a woman with neck flexed to accentuate the ligamentum 
nuchae. 
Tip of coccyx
SII vertebral spinous process
TXII vertebral spinous process
TVII vertebral spinous process
TIII vertebral spinous process
TI vertebral spinous process
Root of spine of scapula
Inferior angle of scapula
Highest point of iliac crest
Iliac crest
Sacral dimple
CVII vertebral spinous process
CII vertebral spinous process
Position of external
occipital protuberance
LIV vertebral spinous process
A
Ligamentum nuchae
CVII vertebral
spinous process
TI vertebral
spinous process
B
C
How to identify specific vertebral 
spinous processes
Identification of vertebral spinous processes (Fig. 2.67A) 
can be used to differentiate between regions of the vertebral 
column and facilitate visualizing the position of deeper 
structures, such as the inferior ends of the spinal cord and 
subarachnoid space.
The spinous process of vertebra CII can be identified 
through deep palpation as the most superior bony protu­
berance in the midline inferior to the skull.
Most of the other spinous processes, except for that of 
vertebra CVII, are not readily palpable because they are 
obscured by soft tissue.

=== PAGE 119 ===
Back
118
The spinous process of CVII is usually visible as a promi­
nent eminence in the midline at the base of the neck (Fig. 
2.67B), particularly when the neck is flexed.
Extending between CVII and the external occipital pro­
tuberance of the skull is the ligamentum nuchae, which is 
readily apparent as a longitudinal ridge when the neck is 
flexed (Fig. 2.67C).
Inferior to the spinous process of CVII is the spinous 
process of TI, which is also usually visible as a midline 
protuberance. Often it is more prominent than the spinous 
process of CVII (Fig. 2.67A,B).
The root of the spine of the scapula is at the same level 
as the spinous process of vertebra TIII, and the inferior 
angle of the scapula is level with the spinous process of 
vertebra TVII (Fig. 2.67A).
The spinous process of vertebra TXII is level with the 
midpoint of a vertical line between the inferior angle of the 
scapula and the iliac crest (Fig. 2.67A).
A horizontal line between the highest point of the iliac 
crest on each side crosses through the spinous process of 
vertebra LIV. The LIII and LV vertebral spinous processes 
can be palpated above and below the LIV spinous process, 
respectively (Fig. 2.67A).
The sacral dimples that mark the position of the poste­
rior superior iliac spine are level with the SII vertebral 
spinous process (Fig. 2.67A).
The tip of the coccyx is palpable at the base of the ver­
tebral column between the gluteal masses (Fig. 2.67A).
The tips of the vertebral spinous processes do not always 
lie in the same horizontal plane as their corresponding 
vertebral bodies. In thoracic regions, the spinous processes 
are long and sharply sloped downward so that their tips lie 
at the level of the vertebral body below. In other words, the 
tip of the TIII vertebral spinous process lies at vertebral 
level TIV.
In lumbar and sacral regions, the spinous processes are 
generally shorter and less sloped than in thoracic regions, 
and their palpable tips more closely reflect the position of 
their corresponding vertebral bodies. As a consequence, 
the palpable end of the spinous process of vertebra LIV lies 
at approximately the LIV vertebral level.
Visualizing the inferior ends of the spinal cord 
and subarachnoid space
The spinal cord does not occupy the entire length of 
the vertebral canal. Normally in adults, it terminates 
at the level of the disc between vertebrae LI and LII; 
however, it may end as high as TXII or as low as the 
disc between vertebrae LII and LIII. The subarachnoid 
space ends at approximately the level of vertebra SII 
(Fig. 2.68A).
Tip of coccyx
SII vertebral spinous process
TXII vertebral spinous process
Inferior end of spinal cord
(normally between
LI and LII vertebra)
Inferior end of
subarachnoid space
A
LIV vertebral spinous process
Fig. 2.68  Back with the ends of the spinal cord and subarachnoid space indicated. A. In a man.

=== PAGE 120 ===
2
119
Surface Anatomy  •  Identifying Major Muscles
Fig. 2.69  Back muscles. A. In a man with latissimus dorsi, 
trapezius, and erector spinae muscles outlined. 
Latissimus
dorsi
Trapezius
Erector spinae muscles
A
Because the subarachnoid space can be accessed in the 
lower lumbar region without endangering the spinal cord, 
it is important to be able to identify the position of the 
lumbar vertebral spinous processes. The LIV vertebral 
spinous process is level with a horizontal line between the 
highest points on the iliac crests. In the lumbar region, the 
palpable ends of the vertebral spinous processes lie opposite 
their corresponding vertebral bodies. The subarachnoid 
space can be accessed between vertebral levels LIII and LIV 
and between LIV and LV without endangering the spinal 
cord (Fig. 2.68B). The subarachnoid space ends at vertebral 
level SII, which is level with the sacral dimples marking the 
posterior superior iliac spines.
Identifying major muscles
A number of intrinsic and extrinsic muscles of the back 
can readily be observed and palpated. The largest of these 
are the trapezius and latissimus dorsi muscles (Fig. 2.69A 
and 2.69B). Retracting the scapulae toward the midline 
can accentuate the rhomboid muscles (Fig. 2.69C), which 
lie deep to the trapezius muscle. The erector spinae muscles 
are visible as two longitudinal columns separated by a 
furrow in the midline (Fig. 2.69A).
LIV vertebral spinous process
Needle
LV  vertebral spinous process
Tip of coccyx
B
Back with the ends of the spinal cord and subarachnoid space indicated. B. In a woman lying on her side in a fetal position, 
which accentuates the lumbar vertebral spinous processes and opens the spaces between adjacent vertebral arches. Cerebrospinal fluid can be 
withdrawn from the subarachnoid space in lower lumbar regions without endangering the spinal cord. 
Fig. 2.68, cont’d
Continued

=== PAGE 121 ===
Back
120
Latissimus dorsi
Rhomboid minor
Rhomboid major
B
C
Fig. 2.69, cont’d Back muscles. B. In a man with arms abducted to accentuate the lateral margins of the latissimus dorsi muscles. C. In a 
woman with scapulae externally rotated and forcibly retracted to accentuate the rhomboid muscles. 

=== PAGE 122 ===
2
121
Clinical Cases  •  Case 1
Clinical cases
Case 1 
CAUDA EQUINA SYNDROME
A 50-year-old man was brought to the emergency 
department with severe lower back pain that had started 
several days ago. In the past 24 hours he has had two 
episodes of fecal incontinence and inability to pass urine 
and now reports numbness and weakness in both his legs.
The attending physician performed a physical examination 
and found that the man had reduced strength during knee 
extension and when dorsiflexing his feet and toes. He also 
had reduced reflexes in his knees and ankles, numbness in 
the perineal (saddle) region, as well as reduced anal 
sphincter tone.
The patient’s symptoms and physical examination findings 
raised serious concern for compression of multiple lumbar 
and sacral nerve roots in the spine, affecting both motor and 
sensory pathways. His reduced power in extending his 
knees and reduced knee reflexes was suggestive of 
compression of the L4 nerve roots. His reduced ability to 
dorsiflex his feet and toes was suggestive of compression of 
the L5 nerve roots. His reduced ankle reflexes was 
suggestive of compression of the S1 and S2 nerve roots, and 
his perineal numbness was suggestive of compression of the 
S3, S4, and S5 nerve roots.
A diagnosis of cauda equina syndrome was made, and the 
patient was transferred for an urgent MRI scan, which 
confirmed the presence of a severely herniating L2-3 disc 
compressing the cauda equina, giving rise to the cauda 
equina syndrome (Fig. 2.70). The patient underwent surgical 
decompression of the cauda equina and made a full 
recovery.
The collection of lumbar and sacral nerve roots beyond the 
conus medullaris has a horsetail-like appearance, from which 
it derives its name “cauda equina.” Compression of the 
cauda equina may be caused by a herniating disc (as in this 
case), fracture fragments following traumatic injury, tumor, 
abscess, or severe degenerative stenosis of the central canal.
Cauda equina syndrome is classed as a surgical emergency 
to prevent permanent and irreversible damage to the 
compressed nerve roots.
Fig. 2.70  MRI of the lumbar spine reveals posterior herniation 
of the L2-3 disc resulting in compression of the cauda equina 
filaments. 
L2-3 intervertebral
disc

=== PAGE 123 ===
Back
122
Case 2
CERVICAL SPINAL CORD INJURY
A 45-year-old man was involved in a serious car accident. 
On examination he had a severe injury to the cervical 
region of his vertebral column with damage to the spinal 
cord. In fact, his breathing became erratic and stopped.
If the cervical spinal cord injury is above the level of C5, 
breathing is likely to stop. The phrenic nerve takes origin 
from C3, C4, and C5 and supplies the diaphragm. Breathing 
may not cease immediately if the lesion is just below C5, but 
does so as the cord becomes edematous and damage 
progresses superiorly. In addition, some respiratory and 
ventilatory exchange may occur by using neck muscles plus 
the sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles, which are 
innervated by the accessory nerve [XI].
The patient was unable to sense or move his upper and 
lower limbs.
The patient has paralysis of the upper and lower limbs and 
is therefore quadriplegic. If breathing is unaffected, the 
lesion is below the level of C5 or at the level of C5. The 
nerve supply to the upper limbs is via the brachial plexus, 
which begins at the C5 level. The site of the spinal cord 
injury is at or above the C5 level.
It is important to remember that although the cord has been 
transected in the cervical region, the cord below this level is 
intact. Reflex activity may therefore occur below the injury, 
but communication with the brain is lost.

=== PAGE 124 ===
2
122.e1
Clinical Cases  •  Case 4
Case 3
PSOAS ABSCESS
A 25-year-old woman complained of increasing lumbar back 
pain. Over the ensuing weeks she was noted to have an 
enlarging lump in the right groin, which was mildly tender 
to touch. On direct questioning, the patient also complained 
of a productive cough with sputum containing mucus and 
blood, and she had a mild temperature.
The chest radiograph revealed a cavitating apical lung mass, 
which explains the pulmonary history.
Given the age of the patient a primary lung cancer is 
unlikely. The hemoptysis (coughing up blood in the sputum) 
and the rest of the history suggest the patient has a lung 
infection. Given the chest radiographic findings of a cavity in 
the apex of the lung, a diagnosis of tuberculosis (TB) was 
made. This was confirmed by bronchoscopy and aspiration 
of pus, which was cultured.
During the patient’s pulmonary infection, the tuberculous 
bacillus had spread via the blood to vertebra LI. The bone 
destruction began in the cancellous bone of the vertebral 
body close to the intervertebral discs. This disease 
progressed and eroded into the intervertebral disc, which 
became infected. The disc was destroyed, and the infected 
disc material extruded around the disc anteriorly and passed 
into the psoas muscle sheath. This is not an uncommon 
finding for a tuberculous infection of the lumbar portion of 
the vertebral column.
As the infection progressed, the pus spread within the psoas 
muscle sheath beneath the inguinal ligament to produce a 
hard mass in the groin. This is a typical finding for a psoas 
abscess.
Fortunately for the patient, there was no evidence of any 
damage within the vertebral canal.
The patient underwent a radiologically guided drainage of 
the psoas abscess and was treated for over 6 months with a 
long-term antibiotic regimen. She made an excellent 
recovery with no further symptoms, although the cavities 
within the lungs remain. It healed with sclerosis.
Case 4
DISSECTING THORACIC ANEURYSM
A 72-year-old fit and healthy man was brought to the 
emergency department with severe back pain beginning at 
the level of the shoulder blades and extending to the 
midlumbar region. The pain was of relatively acute onset 
and was continuous. The patient was able to walk to the 
gurney as he entered the ambulance; however, at the 
emergency department the patient complained of inability 
to use both legs.
The attending physician examined the back thoroughly and 
found no significant abnormality. He noted that there was 
reduced sensation in both legs, and there was virtually no 
power in extensor or flexor groups. The patient was 
tachycardic, which was believed to be due to pain, and the 
blood pressure obtained in the ambulance measured 
120/80 mm Hg. It was noted that the patient’s current blood 
pressure was 80/40 mm Hg; however, the patient did not 
complain of typical clinical symptoms of hypotension.
On first inspection, it is difficult to “add up” these clinical 
symptoms and signs. In essence we have a progressive 
paraplegia associated with severe back pain and an anomaly 
in blood pressure measurements, which are not compatible 
with the clinical state of the patient.
It was deduced that the blood pressure measurements were 
obtained in different arms, and both were reassessed.
The blood pressure measurements were true. In the right 
arm the blood pressure measured 120/80 mm Hg and in the 
left arm the blood pressure measured 80/40 mm Hg. This 
would imply a deficiency of blood to the left arm.
The patient was transferred from the emergency department 
to the CT scanner, and a scan was performed that included 
the chest, abdomen, and pelvis.
The CT scan demonstrated a dissecting thoracic aortic 
aneurysm. Aortic dissection occurs when the tunica intima 
and part of the tunica media of the wall of the aorta become 
separated from the remainder of the tunica media and the 
tunica adventitia of the aorta wall. This produces a false 
lumen. Blood passes not only in the true aortic lumen but 
also through a small hole into the wall of the aorta and into 
the false lumen. It often reenters the true aortic lumen 
(continues)

=== PAGE 125 ===
Back
122.e2
Case 4—cont’d
inferiorly. This produces two channels through which blood 
may flow. The process of the aortic dissection produces 
considerable pain for the patient and is usually of rapid 
onset. Typically the pain is felt between the shoulder blades 
and radiating into the back, and although the pain is not 
from the back musculature or the vertebral column, careful 
consideration of structures other than the back should 
always be sought.
The difference in the blood pressure between the two arms 
indicates the level at which the dissection has begun. The 
“point of entry” is proximal to the left subclavian artery. At 
this level a small flap has been created, which limits the 
blood flow to the left upper limb, giving the low blood 
pressure recording. The brachiocephalic trunk has not been 
affected by the aortic dissection, and hence blood flow 
remains appropriate to the right upper limb.
The paraplegia was caused by ischemia to the spinal cord.
The blood supply to the spinal cord is from a single anterior 
spinal artery and two posterior spinal arteries. These arteries 
are fed via segmental spinal arteries at every vertebral level. 
There are a number of reinforcing arteries (segmental 
medullary arteries) along the length of the spinal cord—the 
largest of which is the artery of Adamkiewicz. This artery of 
Adamkiewicz, a segmental medullary artery, typically arises 
from the lower thoracic or upper lumbar region, and 
unfortunately during this patient’s aortic dissection, the 
origin of this vessel was disrupted. This produces acute 
spinal cord ischemia and has produced the paraplegia in the 
patient.
Unfortunately, the dissection extended, the aorta ruptured, 
and the patient succumbed.
Case 5
SACRAL TUMOR
A 55-year-old woman came to her physician with sensory 
alteration in the right gluteal (buttock) region and in the 
intergluteal (natal) cleft. Examination also demonstrated 
low-grade weakness of the muscles of the foot and subtle 
weakness of the extensor hallucis longus, extensor 
digitorum longus, and fibularis tertius on the right. The 
patient also complained of some mild pain symptoms 
posteriorly in the right gluteal region.
A lesion was postulated in the left sacrum.
Pain in the right sacro-iliac region could easily be attributed 
to the sacro-iliac joint, which is often very sensitive to pain. 
The weakness of the intrinsic muscles of the foot and the 
extensor hallucis longus, extensor digitorum longus, and 
fibularis tertius muscles raises the possibility of an 
abnormality affecting the nerves exiting the sacrum and 
possibly the lumbosacral junction. The altered sensation 
around the gluteal region toward the anus would also 
support these anatomical localizing features.
An X-ray was obtained of the pelvis.
The X-ray appeared on first inspection unremarkable. 
However, the patient underwent further investigation, 
including CT and MRI, which demonstrated a large 
destructive lesion involving the whole of the left sacrum 
extending into the anterior sacral foramina at the S1, S2, and 
S3 levels. Interestingly, plain radiographs of the sacrum may 
often appear normal on first inspection, and further imaging 
should always be sought in patients with a suspected sacral 
abnormality.
The lesion was expansile and lytic.
Most bony metastases are typically nonexpansile. They may 
well erode the bone, producing lytic type of lesions, or may 
become very sclerotic (prostate metastases and breast 
metastases). From time to time we see a mixed pattern of 
lytic and sclerotic.
There are a number of uncommon instances in which certain 
metastases are expansile and lytic. These typically occur in 
renal metastases and may be seen in multiple myeloma. The 
anatomical importance of these specific tumors is that they 
often expand and impinge upon other structures. The 
expansile nature of this patient’s tumor within the sacrum 
was the cause for compression of the sacral nerve roots, 
producing her symptoms.
The patient underwent a course of radiotherapy, had the 
renal tumor excised, and is currently undergoing a course of 
chemoimmunotherapy.
