=== PAGE 431 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
418
Fig. 5.4  Pelvic inlet. 
Pelvic inlet
Ala of sacrum
Sacro-iliac joint
Coccyx
Ischial spine
Anterior superior 
iliac spine
Obturator foramen
Ischial tuberosity
Pubic symphysis
Ischiopubic ramus
Pubic tubercle
SI body
COMPONENT PARTS
Pelvic inlet
The pelvic inlet is somewhat heart shaped and completely 
ringed by bone (Fig. 5.4). Posteriorly, the inlet is bordered 
by the body of vertebra SI, which projects into the inlet as 
the sacral promontory. On each side of this vertebra, 
wing-like transverse processes called the alae (wings) 
contribute to the margin of the pelvic inlet. Laterally, a 
prominent rim on the pelvic bone continues the boundary 
of the inlet forward to the pubic symphysis, where the two 
pelvic bones are joined in the midline.
Structures pass between the pelvic cavity and the 
abdomen through the pelvic inlet.
During childbirth, the fetus passes through the pelvic 
inlet from the abdomen, into which the uterus has 
expanded during pregnancy, and then passes through the 
pelvic outlet.
Pelvic walls
The walls of the true pelvis consist predominantly of bone, 
muscle, and ligaments, with the sacrum, coccyx, and 
inferior half of the pelvic bones forming much of them.
Two ligaments—the sacrospinous and the sacrotu­
berous ligaments—are important architectural elements 
of the walls because they link each pelvic bone to the 
sacrum and coccyx (Fig. 5.5A). These ligaments also 
convert two notches on the pelvic bones—the greater and 
lesser sciatic notches—into foramina on the lateral 
pelvic walls.
Completing the walls are the obturator internus and 
piriformis muscles (Fig. 5.5B), which arise in the pelvis 
and exit through the sciatic foramina to act on the hip 
joint.

=== PAGE 432 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
5
419
Greater sciatic foramen
Lesser sciatic foramen
Obturator foramen
Sacrotuberous ligament
Sacrospinous ligament
Ischial tuberosity
Ischiopubic ramus
Pubic tubercle
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Margin of pelvic inlet
A
Fig. 5.5  Pelvic walls. A. Bones and ligaments of the pelvic walls. B. Muscles of the pelvic walls. 
Margin of pelvic inlet
Piriformis muscle
Obturator internus muscle
B

=== PAGE 434 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
5
421
Fig. 5.7  Pelvic floor. 
Ischial spine
Piriformis muscle
Coccygeus muscle
Coccygeus muscle
Coccyx
Midline raphe
Levator ani muscle
Vaginal orifice
Urethral orifice
Obturator internus muscle
Iliococcygeus muscle
Pubococcygeus muscle
Puborectalis muscle
Deep perineal pouch
Perineal membrane
Pelvic floor
The pelvic floor, which separates the pelvic cavity from the 
perineum, is formed by muscles and fascia (Fig. 5.7).
Two levator ani muscles attach peripherally to the 
pelvic walls and join each other at the midline by a connec­
tive tissue raphe. Together they are the largest components 
of the bowl- or funnel-shaped structure known as the 
pelvic diaphragm, which is completed posteriorly by 
the coccygeus muscles. These latter muscles overlie the 
sacrospinous ligaments and pass between the margins of 
the sacrum and the coccyx and a prominent spine on the 
pelvic bone, the ischial spine.
The pelvic diaphragm forms most of the pelvic floor and 
in its anterior regions contains a U-shaped defect, which is 
associated with elements of the urogenital system.
The anal canal passes from the pelvis to the perineum 
through a posterior circular orifice in the pelvic diaphragm.
The pelvic floor is supported anteriorly by:
■	 the perineal membrane, and
■	 muscles in the deep perineal pouch.
The perineal membrane is a thick, triangular fascial 
sheet that fills the space between the arms of the pubic 
arch, and has a free posterior border (Fig. 5.7). The deep 
perineal pouch is a narrow region superior to the perineal 
membrane.
The margins of the U-shaped defect in the pelvic dia­
phragm merge into the walls of the associated viscera and 
with muscles in the deep perineal pouch below.
The vagina and the urethra penetrate the pelvic floor to 
pass from the pelvic cavity to the perineum.
Pelvic cavity
The pelvic cavity is lined by peritoneum continuous with 
the peritoneum of the abdominal cavity that drapes 
over the superior aspects of the pelvic viscera, but in most 
regions, does not reach the pelvic floor (Fig. 5.8A).
The pelvic viscera are located in the midline of the pelvic 
cavity. The bladder is anterior and the rectum is posterior. 
In women, the uterus lies between the bladder and rectum 
(Fig. 5.8B). Other structures, such as vessels and nerves, lie 
deep to the peritoneum in association with the pelvic walls 
and on either side of the pelvic viscera.

=== PAGE 446 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
433
Regional anatomy
The pelvis is the region of the body surrounded by the 
pelvic bones and the inferior elements of the vertebral 
column. It is divided into two major regions: the superior 
region is the false (greater) pelvis and is part of the abdomi­
nal cavity; the inferior region is the true (lesser) pelvis, 
which encloses the pelvic cavity.
The bowl-shaped pelvic cavity is continuous above with 
the abdominal cavity. The rim of the pelvic cavity (the 
pelvic inlet) is completely encircled by bone. The pelvic 
floor is a fibromuscular structure separating the pelvic 
cavity above from the perineum below.
The perineum is inferior to the pelvic floor and its margin 
is formed by the pelvic outlet. The perineum contains:
■	 the terminal openings of the gastrointestinal and 
urinary systems,
■	 the external opening of the reproductive tract, and
■	 the roots of the external genitalia.
PELVIS
Bones
The bones of the pelvis consist of the right and left pelvic 
(hip) bones, the sacrum, and the coccyx. The sacrum 
articulates superiorly with vertebra LV at the lumbosacral 
joint. The pelvic bones articulate posteriorly with the 
sacrum at the sacro-iliac joints and with each other ante­
riorly at the pubic symphysis.
Pelvic bone
The pelvic bone is irregular in shape and has two major 
parts separated by an oblique line on the medial surface of 
the bone (Fig. 5.19A):
■	 The pelvic bone above this line represents the lateral 
wall of the false pelvis, which is part of the abdominal 
cavity.
■	 The pelvic bone below this line represents the lateral 
wall of the true pelvis, which contains the pelvic cavity.
The linea terminalis is the lower two-thirds of this line 
and contributes to the margin of the pelvic inlet.
The lateral surface of the pelvic bone has a large articu­
lar socket, the acetabulum, which, together with the head 
of the femur, forms the hip joint (Fig. 5.19B).
Inferior to the acetabulum is the large obturator 
foramen, most of which is closed by a flat connective 
tissue membrane, the obturator membrane. A small 
obturator canal remains open superiorly between the 
membrane and adjacent bone, providing a route of com­
munication between the lower limb and the pelvic cavity.
The posterior margin of the bone is marked by two 
notches separated by the ischial spine:
■	 the greater sciatic notch, and
■	 the lesser sciatic notch.
The posterior margin terminates inferiorly as the large 
ischial tuberosity.
The irregular anterior margin of the pelvic bone is 
marked by the anterior superior iliac spine, the ante­
rior inferior iliac spine, and the pubic tubercle.

=== PAGE 449 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
436
Pubis
The anterior and inferior part of the pelvic bone is the 
pubis (Fig. 5.21). It has a body and two arms (rami).
■	 The body is flattened dorsoventrally and articulates 
with the body of the pubic bone on the other side at the 
pubic symphysis. The body has a rounded pubic crest 
on its superior surface that ends laterally as the promi­
nent pubic tubercle.
■	 The superior pubic ramus projects posterolaterally 
from the body and joins with the ilium and ischium at 
its base, which is positioned toward the acetabulum. The 
sharp superior margin of this triangular surface is 
termed the pecten pubis (pectineal line), which 
forms part of the linea terminalis of the pelvic bone and 
the pelvic inlet. Anteriorly, this line is continuous with 
the pubic crest, which also is part of the linea termi­
nalis and pelvic inlet. The superior pubic ramus is 
marked on its inferior surface by the obturator groove, 
which forms the upper margin of the obturator canal.
■	 The inferior ramus projects laterally and inferiorly to 
join with the ramus of the ischium.
Ischium
The ischium is the posterior and inferior part of the pelvic 
bone (Fig. 5.21). It has:
■	 a large body that projects superiorly to join with the 
ilium and the superior ramus of the pubis, and
■	 a ramus that projects anteriorly to join with the inferior 
ramus of the pubis.
The posterior margin of the bone is marked by a promi­
nent ischial spine that separates the lesser sciatic notch, 
below, from the greater sciatic notch, above.
The most prominent feature of the ischium is a large 
tuberosity (the ischial tuberosity) on the posteroinferior 
aspect of the bone. This tuberosity is an important site for 
the attachment of lower limb muscles and for supporting 
the body when sitting.
Sacrum
The sacrum, which has the appearance of an inverted 
triangle, is formed by the fusion of the five sacral vertebrae 
(Fig. 5.22). The base of the sacrum articulates with verte­
bra LV, and its apex articulates with the coccyx. Each of the 
lateral surfaces of the bone bears a large L-shaped facet for 
articulation with the ilium of the pelvic bone. Posterior to 
the facet is a large roughened area for the attachment of 
ligaments that support the sacro-iliac joint. The superior 
surface of the sacrum is characterized by the superior 
The arcuate line forms part of the linea terminalis and 
the pelvic brim.
The portion of the ilium lying inferiorly to the arcuate 
line is the pelvic part of the ilium and contributes to the 
wall of the lesser or true pelvis.
The upper part of the ilium expands to form a flat, fan-
shaped “wing,” which provides bony support for the lower 
abdomen, or false pelvis. This part of the ilium provides 
attachment for muscles functionally associated with 
the lower limb. The anteromedial surface of the wing is 
concave and forms the iliac fossa. The external (gluteal) 
surface of the wing is marked by lines and roughenings 
and is related to the gluteal region of the lower limb 
(Fig. 5.21B).
The entire superior margin of the ilium is thickened to 
form a prominent crest (the iliac crest), which is the site 
of attachment for muscles and fascia of the abdomen, 
back, and lower limb and terminates anteriorly as the 
anterior superior iliac spine and posteriorly as the 
posterior superior iliac spine.
A prominent tubercle, the tuberculum of  the iliac 
crest, projects laterally near the anterior end of the crest; 
the posterior end of the crest thickens to form the iliac 
tuberosity.
Inferior to the anterior superior iliac spine of the crest, 
on the anterior margin of the ilium, is a rounded protuber­
ance called the anterior inferior iliac spine. This struc­
ture serves as the point of attachment for the rectus femoris 
muscle of the anterior compartment of the thigh and the 
iliofemoral ligament associated with the hip joint. A less 
prominent posterior inferior iliac spine occurs along 
the posterior border of the sacral surface of the ilium, 
where the bone angles forward to form the superior margin 
of the greater sciatic notch.
In the clinic
Bone marrow biopsy
In certain diseases (e.g., leukemia), a sample of bone 
marrow must be obtained to assess the stage and severity 
of the problem. The iliac crest is often used for such bone 
marrow biopsies. The iliac crest lies close to the surface 
and is easily palpated.
A bone marrow biopsy is performed by injecting 
anesthetic in the skin and passing a cutting needle 
through the cortical bone of the iliac crest. The bone 
marrow is aspirated and viewed under a microscope. 
Samples of cortical bone can also be obtained in this way 
to provide information about bone metabolism.

=== PAGE 455 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
442
Fig. 5.29  Sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments. A. Medial view of right side of pelvis. B. Function of the ligaments. 
Greater sciatic foramen
Lesser sciatic foramen
Obturator canal
Obturator membrane
Sacrospinous
ligament
Sacrotuberous
ligament
A
B
Greater sciatic
foramen
Lesser sciatic
foramen
Vertebral column
Weight
Ligaments prevent
upward tilting of
sacrum
Sacrospinous
ligament
Sacrotuberous
ligament
Obturator membrane
Pelvic wall
The walls of the pelvic cavity consist of the sacrum, the 
coccyx, the pelvic bones inferior to the linea terminalis, two 
ligaments, and two muscles.
Ligaments of  the pelvic wall
The sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments (Fig. 
5.29A) are major components of the lateral pelvic walls 
that help define the apertures between the pelvic cavity 
and adjacent regions through which structures pass.
■	 The smaller of the two, the sacrospinous ligament, is 
triangular, with its apex attached to the ischial spine 
and its base attached to the related margins of the 
sacrum and the coccyx.
■	 The sacrotuberous ligament is also triangular and is 
superficial to the sacrospinous ligament. Its base has a 
broad attachment that extends from the posterior supe­
rior iliac spine of the pelvic bone, along the dorsal aspect 
and the lateral margin of the sacrum, and onto the 
dorsolateral surface of the coccyx. Laterally, the apex of 
the ligament is attached to the medial margin of the 
ischial tuberosity.
These ligaments stabilize the sacrum on the pelvic bones 
by resisting the upward tilting of the inferior aspect of 
the sacrum (Fig. 5.29B). They also convert the greater 
and lesser sciatic notches of the pelvic bone into foramina 
(Fig. 5.29A,B).
■	 The greater sciatic foramen lies superior to the sacro­
spinous ligament and the ischial spine.
■	 The lesser sciatic foramen lies inferior to the ischial 
spine and sacrospinous ligament between the sacrospi­
nous and sacrotuberous ligaments.
Muscles of  the pelvic wall
Two muscles, the obturator internus and the piriformis, 
contribute to the lateral walls of the pelvic cavity. These 
muscles originate in the pelvic cavity but attach peripher­
ally to the femur.
Obturator internus
The obturator internus is a flat, fan-shaped muscle that 
originates from the deep surface of the obturator mem­
brane and from associated regions of the pelvic bone that 
surround the obturator foramen (Fig. 5.30 and Table 5.1).

=== PAGE 456 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
443
Table 5.1  Muscles of the pelvic walls
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Obturator 
internus
Anterolateral wall of true 
pelvis (deep surface of 
obturator membrane and 
surrounding bone)
Medial surface of greater 
trochanter of femur
Nerve to obturator internus 
L5, SI
Lateral rotation of the extended 
hip joint; abduction of flexed hip
Piriformis
Anterior surface of sacrum 
between anterior sacral 
foramina
Medial side of superior border 
of greater trochanter of femur
Branches from SI, and S2
Lateral rotation of the extended 
hip joint; abduction of flexed hip
Fig. 5.30  Obturator internus and piriformis muscles (medial view of right side of pelvis). 
Piriformis muscle
Obturator internus muscle
SII
Anterior sacral 
foramina
SIII
SIV
The muscle fibers of the obturator internus converge to 
form a tendon that leaves the pelvic cavity through the 
lesser sciatic foramen, makes a 90° bend around the 
ischium between the ischial spine and ischial tuberosity, 
and then passes posterior to the hip joint to insert on the 
greater trochanter of the femur.
The obturator internus forms a large part of the antero­
lateral wall of the pelvic cavity.
Piriformis
The piriformis is triangular and originates in the bridges of 
bone between the four anterior sacral foramina. It passes 
laterally through the greater sciatic foramen, crosses the 
posterosuperior aspect of the hip joint, and inserts on 
the greater trochanter of the femur above the insertion of 
the obturator internus muscle (Fig. 5.30 and Table 5.1).
A large part of the posterolateral wall of the pelvic 
cavity is formed by the piriformis. In addition, this muscle 
separates the greater sciatic foramen into two regions, one 
above the muscle and one below. Vessels and nerves cours­
ing between the pelvic cavity and the gluteal region pass 
through these two regions.

=== PAGE 457 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
444
Fig. 5.31  Apertures in the pelvic wall. 
Obturator canal – obturator nerve and vessels
Obturator internus muscle
Greater sciatic foramen,
above and below
piriformis muscle
Lesser sciatic foramen
Superior gluteal nerve
and vessels
Sciatic nerve, inferior gluteal, 
posterior femoral cutaneous,
and quadratus femoris nerves,
and the inferior gluteal 
and internal pudendal vessels
Pudendal nerve and internal
pudendal vessels and nerve
to obturator internus
pelvic bone, the sacrotuberous and the sacrospinous liga­
ments, and the spine of the ischium.
The piriformis muscle passes through the greater sciatic 
foramen, dividing it into two parts.
■	 The superior gluteal nerves and vessels pass through the 
foramen above the piriformis.
■	 Passing through the foramen below the piriformis are 
the inferior gluteal nerves and vessels, the sciatic nerve, 
the pudendal nerve, the internal pudendal vessels, the 
posterior femoral cutaneous nerves, and the nerves to 
the obturator internus and quadratus femoris muscles.
Lesser sciatic foramen
The lesser sciatic foramen is formed by the lesser sciatic 
notch of the pelvic bone, the ischial spine, the sacrospinous 
ligament, and the sacrotuberous ligament (Fig. 5.31). 
The tendon of the obturator internus muscle passes 
through this foramen to enter the gluteal region of the 
lower limb.
Apertures in the pelvic wall
Each lateral pelvic wall has three major apertures through 
which structures pass between the pelvic cavity and other 
regions:
■	 the obturator canal,
■	 the greater sciatic foramen, and
■	 the lesser sciatic foramen.
Obturator canal
At the top of the obturator foramen is the obturator canal, 
which is bordered by the obturator membrane, the 
associated obturator muscles, and the superior pubic 
ramus (Fig. 5.31). The obturator nerve and vessels pass 
from the pelvic cavity to the thigh through this canal.
Greater sciatic foramen
The greater sciatic foramen is a major route of communi­
cation between the pelvic cavity and the lower limb 
(Fig. 5.31). It is formed by the greater sciatic notch in the 

=== PAGE 460 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
447
Fig. 5.34  Pelvic diaphragm. 
Obturator internus muscle
Obturator canal
Piriformis
muscle
Anal aperture
Puborectalis
 muscle
Pubococcygeus
 muscle
Iliococcygeus
 muscle
Urogenital hiatus
Sacrospinous 
ligament (cut)
Anococcygeal
ligament
Levator ani
Tendinous arch
Coccygeus 
muscle
Table 5.2  Muscles of the pelvic diaphragm
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Levator ani
In a line around the pelvic wall 
beginning on the posterior 
aspect of the pubic bone 
and extending across the 
obturator internus muscle as 
a tendinous arch (thickening of 
the obturator internus fascia) to 
the ischial spine
The anterior part is attached 
to the superior surface of the 
perineal membrane; the 
posterior part meets its 
partner on the other side 
at the perineal body, around 
the anal canal, and along the 
anococcygeal ligament
Branches direct from the 
anterior ramus of S4, and by 
the inferior rectal branch of 
the pudendal nerve (S2 to S4)
Contributes to the formation of 
the pelvic floor, which supports 
the pelvic viscera; maintains 
an angle between the rectum 
and anal canal; reinforces the 
external anal sphincter and, in 
women, functions as a vaginal 
sphincter
Coccygeus
Ischial spine and pelvic surface 
of the sacrospinous ligament
Lateral margin of coccyx and 
related border of sacrum
Branches from the anterior 
rami of S3 and S4
Contributes to the formation of 
the pelvic floor, which supports 
the pelvic viscera; pulls coccyx 
forward after defecation

=== PAGE 493 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
480
Fig. 5.60  Sacral and coccygeal plexuses. 
Lumbosacral trunk
Superior gluteal nerve
Inferior gluteal nerve
Nerve to piriformis muscle
Obturator nerve
(from lumbar plexus)
Sciatic nerve
Posterior femoral
cutaneous nerve
Pudendal nerve
Perforating
cutaneous nerve
Nerves to coccygeus,
levator ani, and external
anal sphincter muscles
Anococcygeal 
nerves
Coccygeal 
plexus
L4
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
Pelvic splanchnic 
nerves 
(parasympathetics 
from S2 to S4)
Nerve to obturator
internus and superior
gemellus muscles
Nerve to quadratus
femoris and inferior
gemellus muscles
are formed by the ventral rami of S1 to Co, with a signifi­
cant contribution from L4 and L5, which enter the pelvis 
from the lumbar plexus (Fig. 5.60). Nerves from these 
mainly somatic plexuses contribute to the innervation of 
the lower limb and muscles of the pelvis and perineum. 
Cutaneous branches supply skin over the medial side of the 
foot, the posterior aspect of the lower limb, and most of the 
perineum.
Nerves
Somatic plexuses
Sacral and coccygeal plexuses
The sacral and coccygeal plexuses are situated on the 
posterolateral wall of the pelvic cavity and generally occur 
in the plane between the muscles and blood vessels. They 

=== PAGE 494 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
481
laterally and inferiorly on the pelvic wall. The lumbosacral 
trunk, consisting of part of the anterior ramus of L4 and 
all of the anterior ramus of L5, courses vertically into the 
pelvic cavity from the abdomen by passing immediately 
anterior to the sacro-iliac joint.
Gray rami communicantes from ganglia of the sympa­
thetic trunk connect with each of the anterior rami and 
carry postganglionic sympathetic fibers destined for the 
Sacral plexus
The sacral plexus on each side is formed by the anterior 
rami of S1 to S4, and the lumbosacral trunk (L4 and L5) 
(Fig. 5.61). The plexus is formed in relation to the anterior 
surface of the piriformis muscle, which is part of the pos­
terolateral pelvic wall. Sacral contributions to the plexus 
pass out of the anterior sacral foramina and course 
Fig. 5.61  Components and branches of the sacral and coccygeal plexuses. 
L4
L5
S1
Sciatic nerve
To obturator internus muscle
To quadratus femoris and
inferior gemellus muscles
Pudendal nerve
Pelvic splanchnic nerves
Pelvic splanchnic
nerve
Posterior femoral cutaneous nerve
Perforating cutaneous nerve
Inferior gluteal
Superior gluteal
Lumbosacral trunk
Common fibular part
Tibial part
S2
S3
S4
S5
Co
To piriformis muscle
Anococcygeal nerves
Ventral divisions
Dorsal divisions
Anterior rami
Coccygeal plexus
To levator ani, coccygeus, and external anal sphincter muscles
Sacral plexus

=== PAGE 495 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
482
inferior to the piriformis muscle, and enter the gluteal 
region of the lower limb. Other nerves leave the pelvic 
cavity using different routes; a few nerves do not leave the 
pelvic cavity and course directly into the muscles in the 
pelvic cavity. Finally, two nerves that leave the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen loop around the ischial 
spine and sacrospinous ligament and pass medially through 
the lesser sciatic foramen to supply structures in the 
perineum and lateral pelvic wall.
Sciatic nerve.  The sciatic nerve is the largest nerve of 
the body and carries contributions from L4 to S3 (Figs. 
5.60 and 5.61). It:
■	 forms on the anterior surface of the piriformis muscle 
and leaves the pelvic cavity through the greater sciatic 
foramen inferior to the piriformis;
periphery to the somatic nerves (Fig. 5.62). In addition, 
special visceral nerves (pelvic splanchnic nerves) origi­
nating from S2 to S4 deliver preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers to the pelvic part of the prevertebral plexus (Figs. 
5.60 and 5.61).
Each anterior ramus has ventral and dorsal divisions 
that combine with similar divisions from other levels to 
form terminal nerves (Fig. 5.61). The anterior ramus of S4 
has only a ventral division.
Branches of the sacral plexus include the sciatic nerve 
and gluteal nerves, which are major nerves of the lower 
limb, and the pudendal nerve, which is the nerve of the 
perineum (Table 5.4). Numerous smaller branches supply 
the pelvic wall, floor, and lower limb.
Most nerves originating from the sacral plexus leave the 
pelvic cavity by passing through the greater sciatic foramen 
Fig. 5.62  Sympathetic trunks in the pelvis. 
Gray ramus communicans
Sympathetic trunks
Ganglion impar
Sacral splanchnic
nerves to inferior
hypogastric plexus

=== PAGE 496 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
483
Table 5.4  Branches of the sacral and coccygeal plexuses (spinal segments in parentheses do not consistently participate)
Branch
SACRAL PLEXUS
 
Sciatic
Spinal segments
Motor function
Tibial part
L4 to S3
All muscles in the posterior or hamstring compartment of the thigh (including the 
hamstring part of the adductor magnus) except for the short head of the biceps
All muscles in the posterior compartment of the leg
All muscles in the sole of the foot
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Skin on posterolateral and lateral surfaces of foot and sole of foot
Common fibular part
L4 to S2
Motor function
Short head of biceps in the posterior compartment of the thigh
All muscles in the anterior and lateral compartments of the leg
Extensor digitorum brevis in the foot (also contributes to the supply of the first dorsal 
interosseous muscle)
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Skin on the anterolateral surface of the leg and dorsal surface of the foot
Pudendal
S2 to S4
Motor function
Skeletal muscles in the perineum including the external urethral and anal sphincters and 
levator ani (overlaps in supply of the levator ani and external sphincter with branches 
directly from ventral division of S4)
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Most skin of the perineum. Penis and clitoris
Superior gluteal
L4 to S1
Motor function
Gluteus medius, gluteus minimus, and tensor fasciae latae
Inferior gluteal
L5 to S2
Motor function
Gluteus maximus
Nerve to obturator internus 
and superior gemellus
L5 to S2
Motor function
Obturator internus and superior gemellus
(continues)

=== PAGE 497 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
484
Branch
Nerve to quadratus femoris 
and inferior gemellus
L4 to S1
Motor function
Quadratus femoris and inferior gemellus
Posterior femoral cutaneous 
(posterior cutaneous nerve 
of thigh)
S1, S3
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Skin on the posterior aspect of the thigh
Perforating cutaneous
S2, S3
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Skin over gluteal fold (overlaps with posterior femoral cutaneous)
Nerve to piriformis
S1, S2
Motor function
Piriformis muscle
Nerves to levator ani, 
coccygeus, and external anal 
sphincter
S4
Motor function
Levator ani, coccygeus, and external anal sphincter. (Overlaps with pudendal nerve)
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Small patch of skin between anus and coccyx
Pelvic splanchnic nerves
S2, S3 (4)
Motor (visceral) function
Visceral motor (preganglionic parasympathetic) to pelvic part of prevertebral plexus
Stimulate erection, modulate mobility in gastrointestinal system distal to the left colic 
flexure, inhibitory to internal urethral sphincter
Sensory (visceral) function
Visceral afferents (that follow the parasympathetics) from pelvic viscera and distal parts 
of colon. Pain from cervix and possibly from bladder and proximal urethra
COCCYGEAL PLEXUS
 
Anococcygeal nerves
S4 to Co
Sensory (cutaneous) function
Perianal skin
Table 5.4  Branches of the sacral and coccygeal plexuses (spinal segments in parentheses do not consistently participate)—cont’d

=== PAGE 498 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
485
Other branches of the sacral plexus.  Other branches of the 
sacral plexus include:
■	 motor branches to muscles of the gluteal region, pelvic 
wall, and pelvic floor (superior and inferior gluteal 
nerves, nerve to obturator internus and superior gemel­
lus, nerve to quadratus femoris and inferior gemellus, 
nerve to piriformis, nerves to levator ani); and
■	 sensory nerves to skin over the inferior gluteal region 
and posterior aspects of the thigh and upper leg (perfo­
rating cutaneous nerve and posterior cutaneous nerve 
of the thigh) (Figs. 5.60 and 5.61).
The superior gluteal nerve, formed by branches from 
the dorsal divisions of L4 to S1, leaves the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen superior to the pirifor­
mis muscle and supplies muscles in the gluteal 
region—gluteus medius, gluteus minimus, and tensor 
fasciae latae (tensor of  fascia lata) muscles.
The inferior gluteal nerve, formed by branches from 
the dorsal divisions of L5 to S2, leaves the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle and supplies the gluteus maximus, the largest 
muscle in the gluteal region.
Both superior and inferior gluteal nerves are accompa­
nied by corresponding arteries.
The nerve to the obturator internus and the associ­
ated superior gemellus muscle originates from the 
ventral divisions of L5 to S2 and leaves the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle. Like the pudendal nerve, it passes around the 
ischial spine and through the lesser sciatic foramen to 
enter the perineum and supply the obturator internus 
muscle from the medial side of the muscle, inferior to the 
attachment of the levator ani muscle.
The nerve to the quadratus femoris muscle and the 
inferior gemellus muscle, and the posterior cutaneous 
nerve of  the thigh (posterior femoral cutaneous 
nerve) also leave the pelvic cavity through the greater 
sciatic foramen inferior to the piriformis muscle and course 
to muscles and skin, respectively, in the lower limb.
Unlike most of the other nerves originating from the 
sacral plexus, which leave the pelvic cavity through the 
greater sciatic foramen either above or below the piriformis 
muscle, the perforating cutaneous nerve leaves the 
pelvic cavity by penetrating directly through the sacrotu­
berous ligament and then courses to skin over the inferior 
aspect of the buttocks.
The nerve to the piriformis and a number of small 
nerves to the levator ani and coccygeus muscles originate 
from the sacral plexus and pass directly into their target 
muscles without leaving the pelvic cavity.
■	 passes through the gluteal region into the thigh, where 
it divides into its two major branches, the common 
fibular nerve (common peroneal nerve) and the tibial 
nerve—dorsal divisions of L4, L5, S1, and S2 are carried 
in the common fibular part of the nerve and the ventral 
divisions of L4, L5, S1, S2, and S3 are carried in the 
tibial part;
■	 innervates muscles in the posterior compartment of the 
thigh and muscles in the leg and foot; and
■	 carries sensory fibers from the skin of the foot and 
lateral leg.
Pudendal nerve.  The pudendal nerve forms anteriorly 
to the lower part of the piriformis muscle from ventral 
divisions of S2 to S4 (Figs. 5.60 and 5.61). It:
■	 leaves the pelvic cavity through the greater sciatic 
foramen, inferior to the piriformis muscle, and enters 
the gluteal region;
■	 courses into the perineum by immediately passing 
around the sacrospinous ligament, where the ligament 
joins the ischial spine, and through the lesser sciatic 
foramen (this course takes the nerve out of the pelvic 
cavity, around the peripheral attachment of the pelvic 
floor, and into the perineum);
■	 is accompanied throughout its course by the internal 
pudendal vessels; and
■	 innervates skin and skeletal muscles of the perineum, 
including the external anal and external urethral 
sphincters.
In the clinic
Pudendal block
Pudendal block anesthesia is performed to relieve the pain 
associated with childbirth. Although the use of this 
procedure is less common since the widespread adoption 
of epidural anesthesia, it provides an excellent option for 
women who have a contraindication to neuraxial anesthesia 
(e.g., spinal anatomy, low platelets, too close to delivery). 
Pudendal blocks are also used for certain types of chronic 
pelvic pain and in some rectal or urological procedures. 
The injection is usually given where the pudendal nerve 
crosses the lateral aspect of the sacrospinous ligament 
near its attachment to the ischial spine. During childbirth, 
a finger inserted into the vagina can palpate the ischial 
spine. The needle is passed transcutaneously to the 
medial aspect of the ischial spine and around the 
sacrospinous ligament. Infiltration is performed and the 
perineum is anesthetized. Pudendal nerve blocks can also 
be performed with imaging guidance (using fluoroscopy, 
computed tomography, or ultrasound) to localize the 
nerve rather than relying purely on anatomical landmarks.

=== PAGE 499 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
486
penetrate the coccygeus muscle to enter the pelvic cavity 
and join with the anterior ramus of S4 to form a single 
trunk, from which small anococcygeal nerves originate 
(Table 5.4). These nerves penetrate the muscle and the 
overlying sacrospinous and sacrotuberous ligaments and 
pass superficially to innervate skin in the anal triangle of 
the perineum.
Visceral plexuses
Paravertebral sympathetic chain
The paravertebral part of the visceral nervous system is 
represented in the pelvis by the inferior ends of the sympa­
thetic trunks (Fig. 5.63A). Each trunk enters the pelvic 
cavity from the abdomen by passing over the ala of the 
The obturator nerve (L2 to L4) is a branch of the 
lumbar plexus. It passes inferiorly along the posterior 
abdominal wall within the psoas muscle, emerges from the 
medial surface of the psoas, passes posteriorly to the 
common iliac artery and medially to the internal iliac 
artery at the pelvic inlet, and then courses along the lateral 
pelvic wall. It leaves the pelvic cavity by traveling through 
the obturator canal and supplies the adductor region of the 
thigh.
Coccygeal plexus
The small coccygeal plexus has a minor contribution from 
S4 and is formed mainly by the anterior rami of S5 and 
Co, which originate inferiorly to the pelvic floor. They 
L5
S1
S2
S3
S4
Pelvic splanchnic nerves
(parasympathetics
from S2 to S4)
Sacral splanchnic nerves
Gray rami
communicantes
Sympathetic
trunk
Hypogastric 
nerve
Ganglion
impar
Superior 
hypogastric 
plexus
Inferior hypogastric
plexus
Pelvic parasympathetics ascending
Sympathetics descending
A
Fig. 5.63  Pelvic extensions of the prevertebral plexus. A. Anterior view. 

=== PAGE 503 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
490
Anterior trunk
Branches of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery 
include the superior vesical artery, the umbilical artery, the 
inferior vesical artery, the middle rectal artery, the uterine 
artery, the vaginal artery, the obturator artery, the internal 
pudendal artery, and the inferior gluteal artery (Fig. 5.65).
■	 The first branch of the anterior trunk is the umbilical 
artery, which gives origin to the superior vesical artery 
and then travels forward just inferior to the margin of 
the pelvic inlet. Anteriorly, the vessel leaves the pelvic 
cavity and ascends on the internal aspect of the anterior 
abdominal wall to reach the umbilicus. In the fetus, the 
umbilical artery is large and carries blood from the 
fetus to the placenta. After birth, the vessel closes distally 
to the origin of the superior vesical artery and eventu­
ally becomes a solid fibrous cord. On the anterior 
abdominal wall, the cord raises a fold of peritoneum 
termed the medial umbilical fold. The fibrous remnant 
of the umbilical artery itself is the medial umbilical 
ligament.
■	 The superior vesical artery normally originates from 
the root of the umbilical artery and courses medially 
and inferiorly to supply the superior aspect of the 
bladder and distal parts of the ureter. In men, it also 
may give rise to an artery that supplies the ductus 
deferens.
■	 The inferior vesical artery occurs in men and supplies 
branches to the bladder, ureter, seminal vesicle, and 
prostate. The vaginal artery in women is the equivalent 
of the inferior vesical artery in men and, descending to 
the vagina, supplies branches to the vagina and to 
adjacent parts of the bladder and rectum. The vaginal 
artery and uterine artery may originate together as a 
common branch from the anterior trunk, or the vaginal 
artery may arise independently.
■	 The middle rectal artery courses medially to supply 
the rectum. The vessel anastomoses with the superior 
rectal artery, which originates from the inferior mesen­
teric artery in the abdomen, and the inferior rectal 
artery, which originates from the internal pudendal 
artery in the perineum.
■	 The obturator artery courses anteriorly along the 
pelvic wall and leaves the pelvic cavity via the obturator 
canal. Together with the obturator nerve, above, and 
Internal iliac artery
The internal iliac artery originates from the common iliac 
artery on each side, approximately at the level of the 
intervertebral disc between LV and SI, and lies anterome­
dial to the sacro-iliac joint (Fig. 5.64). The vessel courses 
inferiorly over the pelvic inlet and then divides into anterior 
and posterior trunks at the level of the superior border of 
the greater sciatic foramen. Branches from the posterior 
trunk contribute to the supply of the lower posterior 
abdominal wall, the posterior pelvic wall, and the gluteal 
region. Branches from the anterior trunk supply the pelvic 
viscera, the perineum, the gluteal region, the adductor 
region of the thigh, and, in the fetus, the placenta.
Posterior trunk
Branches of the posterior trunk of the internal iliac artery 
are the iliolumbar artery, the lateral sacral artery, and the 
superior gluteal artery (Fig. 5.64).
■	 The iliolumbar artery ascends laterally back out of 
the pelvic inlet and divides into a lumbar branch and an 
iliac branch. The lumbar branch contributes to the 
supply of the posterior abdominal wall, psoas and qua­
dratus lumborum muscles, and cauda equina, via a 
small spinal branch that passes through the interverte­
bral foramen between LV and SI. The iliac branch passes 
laterally into the iliac fossa to supply muscle and bone.
■	 The lateral sacral arteries, usually two, originate 
from the posterior division of the internal iliac artery 
and course medially and inferiorly along the posterior 
pelvic wall. They give rise to branches that pass into the 
anterior sacral foramina to supply related bone and soft 
tissues, structures in the vertebral (sacral) canal, and 
skin and muscle posterior to the sacrum.
■	 The superior gluteal artery is the largest branch of 
the internal iliac artery and is the terminal continua­
tion of the posterior trunk. It courses posteriorly, usually 
passing between the lumbosacral trunk and anterior 
ramus of S1, to leave the pelvic cavity through the 
greater sciatic foramen above the piriformis muscle and 
enter the gluteal region of the lower limb. This vessel 
makes a substantial contribution to the blood supply of 
muscles and skin in the gluteal region and also supplies 
branches to adjacent muscles and bones of the pelvic 
walls.

=== PAGE 504 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Pelvis
5
491
S1
S2
S3
S4
Median sacral artery 
(from aorta in abdomen)
Internal iliac artery
Anterior trunk of 
internal iliac artery
Dorsal artery of penis
Obturator artery
Superior vesical artery
Inferior vesical artery
Inferior gluteal artery
Internal pudendal 
artery
Middle rectal artery 
Umbilical artery
A
Fig. 5.65  Branches of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery. A. Male. 
it supplies are the erectile tissues of the clitoris and the 
penis.
■	 The inferior gluteal artery is a large terminal branch 
of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery. It passes 
between the anterior rami S1 and S2 or S2 and S3 of 
the sacral plexus and leaves the pelvic cavity through 
the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the piriformis 
muscle. It enters and contributes to the blood supply of 
the gluteal region and anastomoses with a network of 
vessels around the hip joint.
obturator vein, below, it enters and supplies the adduc­
tor region of the thigh.
■	 The internal pudendal artery courses inferiorly from 
its origin in the anterior trunk and leaves the pelvic 
cavity through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to 
the piriformis muscle. In association with the pudendal 
nerve on its medial side, the vessel passes laterally to the 
ischial spine and then through the lesser sciatic foramen 
to enter the perineum. The internal pudendal artery is 
the main artery of the perineum. Among the structures 

=== PAGE 521 ===
Pelvis and Perineum
508
Fig. 5.75  Superficial fascia. A. Lateral view. B. Anterior view. 
Membranous layer
of superficial fascia
Anterior superior iliac spine
Attachment of membranous
layer of superficial fascia
to fascia lata of thigh 
Posterior margin of
perineal membrane 
Fused to posterior margin of
perineal membrane
Muscles of abdominal wall
Inguinal ligament
Fascia lata of thigh
Pubic tubercle
A
B
it enters and courses through the perineum, it travels along 
the lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa in the pudendal 
canal, which is a tubular compartment formed in the 
fascia that covers the obturator internus muscle. This 
pudendal canal also contains the internal pudendal artery 
and accompanying veins.
The pudendal nerve (Fig. 5.76) has three major 
terminal branches—the inferior rectal and perineal nerves 
and the dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris—which are 
Somatic nerves
Pudendal nerve
The major somatic nerve of the perineum is the pudendal 
nerve. This nerve originates from the sacral plexus and 
carries fibers from spinal cord levels S2 to S4. It leaves the 
pelvic cavity through the greater sciatic foramen inferior 
to the piriformis muscle, passes around the sacrospinous 
ligament, and then enters the anal triangle of the perineum 
by passing medially through the lesser sciatic foramen. As 

=== PAGE 524 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Perineum
5
511
■	 A urethral artery also penetrates the perineal mem­
brane and supplies the penile urethra and surrounding 
erectile tissue to the glans.
■	 Near the anterior margin of the deep perineal pouch, 
the internal pudendal artery bifurcates into two termi­
nal branches. A deep artery of  the penis penetrates 
the perineal membrane to enter the crus and supply the 
crus and corpus cavernosum of the body. The dorsal 
artery of  the penis penetrates the anterior margin of 
the perineal membrane to meet the dorsal surface of the 
body of the penis. The vessel courses along the dorsal 
surface of the penis, medial to the dorsal nerve, and 
supplies the glans penis and superficial tissues of the 
penis; it also anastomoses with branches of the deep 
artery of the penis and the urethral artery.
Branches that supply the erectile tissues in women are 
similar to those in men.
■	 Arteries of  the bulb of  the vestibule supply the bulb 
of the vestibule and related vagina.
■	 Deep arteries of  the clitoris supply the crura and 
corpus cavernosum of the body.
■	 Dorsal arteries of  the clitoris supply surrounding 
tissues and the glans.
External pudendal arteries
The external pudendal arteries consist of a superficial 
vessel and a deep vessel, which originate from the femoral 
artery in the thigh. They course medially to enter the 
perineum anteriorly and supply related skin of the penis 
and scrotum or the clitoris and labia majora.
Testicular and cremasteric arteries
In men, the testicular arteries originate from the 
abdominal aorta and descend into the scrotum through 
the inguinal canal to supply the testes. Also, cremasteric 
arteries, which originate from the inferior epigastric 
branch of the external iliac artery, accompany the sper­
matic cord into the scrotum.
In women, small cremasteric arteries follow the round 
ligament of the uterus through the inguinal canal.
Veins
Veins in the perineum generally accompany the arteries 
and join the internal pudendal veins that connect with 
the internal iliac vein in the pelvis (Fig. 5.78). The excep­
tion is the deep dorsal vein of  the penis or clitoris that 
drains mainly the glans and the corpora cavernosa. The 
deep dorsal vein courses along the midline between the 
Blood vessels
Arteries
The most significant artery of the perineum is the internal 
pudendal artery (Fig. 5.77). Other arteries entering the 
area include the external pudendal, the testicular, and the 
cremasteric arteries.
Internal pudendal artery
The internal pudendal artery originates as a branch of 
the anterior trunk of the internal iliac artery in the pelvis 
(Fig. 5.77). Along with the pudendal nerve, it leaves the 
pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the 
piriformis muscle. It passes around the ischial spine, where 
the artery lies lateral to the nerve, enters the perineum by 
coursing through the lesser sciatic foramen, and accompa­
nies the pudendal nerve in the pudendal canal on the 
lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa.
The branches of the internal pudendal artery are similar 
to those of the pudendal nerve in the perineum and include 
the inferior rectal and perineal arteries, and branches to 
the erectile tissues of the penis and clitoris (Fig. 5.77).
Inferior rectal arteries
One or more inferior rectal arteries originate from the 
internal pudendal artery in the anal triangle and cross the 
ischio-anal fossa medially to branch and supply muscle 
and related skin (Fig. 5.77). They anastomose with middle 
and superior rectal arteries from the internal iliac artery 
and the inferior mesenteric artery, respectively, to form a 
network of vessels that supply the rectum and anal canal.
Perineal artery
The perineal artery originates near the anterior end of 
the pudendal canal and gives off a transverse perineal 
branch, and a posterior scrotal or labial artery to sur­
rounding tissues and skin (Fig. 5.77).
Terminal part of the internal pudendal artery
The terminal part of the internal pudendal artery accom­
panies the dorsal nerve of the penis or clitoris into the deep 
perineal pouch and supplies branches to the tissues in the 
deep perineal pouch and erectile tissues.
Branches that supply the erectile tissues in men include 
the artery to the bulb of the penis, the urethral artery, the 
deep artery of the penis, and the dorsal artery of the penis 
(Fig. 5.77).
■	 The artery of  the bulb of  the penis has a branch 
that supplies the bulbo-urethral gland and then pene­
trates the perineal membrane to supply the corpus 
spongiosum.

=== PAGE 538 ===
5
524.e1
Clinical cases  •  Case 5
Case 4
nerve, which is a branch of the sciatic nerve in the lower 
limb.
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and 
pelvis revealed a mass in the posterior aspect of the right 
side of the pelvis. The mass was anterior to the piriformis 
muscle and adjacent to the rectum.
On the anterior belly of the piriformis muscle, the sciatic 
nerve is formed from the roots of L4 to S3 nerves. The mass 
in the patient’s pelvis compressed this nerve, producing his 
sensory and motor dysfunction.
During surgery, the mass was found to be a benign nerve 
tumor and was excised. This patient had no long-standing 
neurological deficit.
SCIATIC NERVE COMPRESSION
A young man developed pain in his right gluteal region, in 
the posterior aspect of the thigh and around the posterior 
and lateral aspects of the leg. On further questioning, he 
reported that the pain also radiated over the lateral part of 
the foot, particularly around the lateral malleolus.
The areas of pain correspond to dermatomes L4 to S3 
nerves.
Over the following weeks, the patient began to develop 
muscular weakness, predominantly footdrop.
These findings are consistent with loss of the motor 
function and sensory change in the common fibular 
Case 5
LEFT COMMON ILIAC ARTERY OBSTRUCTION
A 65-year-old man was examined by a surgical intern 
because he had a history of buttock pain and impotence. 
On examination he had a reduced peripheral pulse on 
the left foot compared to the right. On direct questioning, 
the patient revealed that he experienced severe left-sided 
buttock pain after walking 100 yards. After a short 
period of rest, he could walk another 100 yards before 
the same symptoms recurred. He also noticed that 
over the past year he was unable to obtain an erection. 
He smoked heavily and was on no other drugs or 
treatment.
The pain in the left buttock is ischemic in nature. He gives a 
typical history relating to lack of blood flow to the muscles. 
A similar finding is present when muscular branches of the 
femoral artery are occluded or stenosed. Such patients 
develop similar (ischemic) pain in the calf muscles called 
intermittent claudication.
How does the blood get to the gluteal muscles?
Blood arrives at the aortic bifurcation and then passes 
into the common iliac arteries, which divide into the internal 
and external iliac vessels. The internal iliac artery then 
divides into anterior and posterior divisions, which in 
turn give rise to vessels that leave the pelvis by passing 
through the greater sciatic foramen and supply the gluteal 
muscles. The internal pudendal artery also arises from the 
anterior division of the internal iliac artery and supplies the 
penis.
The patient’s symptoms occur on the left side, suggesting 
that an obstruction exists on that side only.
Because the patient’s symptoms occur on the left side only, 
the lesion is likely in the left common iliac artery (eFig. 5.88) 
and is preventing blood flow into the external and internal 
iliac arteries on the left side.
(continues)

=== PAGE 545 ===
Lower Limb
528
Fig. 6.2  Regions of the lower limb. 
Pubic tubercle
Inguinal ligament
Anterior abdominal wall
Anterior superior
iliac spine
Anterior thigh
Knee joint
Leg
Ankle joint
Foot
Posterior thigh
Gluteal region
Back
Iliac crest
Gluteal fold
The lower limb is divided into the gluteal region, thigh, 
leg, and foot on the basis of major joints, component bones, 
and superficial landmarks (Fig. 6.2):
■	 The gluteal region is posterolateral and between the 
iliac crest and the fold of skin (gluteal fold) that defines 
the lower limit of the buttocks.
■	 Anteriorly, the thigh is between the inguinal ligament 
and the knee joint—the hip joint is just inferior to the 
middle third of the inguinal ligament, and the posterior 
thigh is between the gluteal fold and the knee.
■	 The leg is between the knee and ankle joint.
■	 The foot is distal to the ankle joint.

=== PAGE 546 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Function
6
529
FUNCTION
Support the body weight
A major function of the lower limb is to support the weight 
of the body with minimal expenditure of energy. When 
standing erect, the center of gravity is anterior to the edge 
of the SII vertebra in the pelvis (Fig. 6.4). The vertical line 
through the center of gravity is slightly posterior to the 
hip joints, anterior to the knee and ankle joints, and 
directly over the almost circular support base formed by the 
feet on the ground and holds the knee and hip joints in 
extension.
The organization of ligaments at the hip and knee joints, 
together with the shape of the articular surfaces, particu­
larly at the knee, facilitates “locking” of these joints into 
position when standing, thereby reducing the muscular 
energy required to maintain a standing position.
Locomotion
A second major function of the lower limbs is to move the 
body through space. This involves the integration of move­
ments at all joints in the lower limb to position the foot on 
the ground and to move the body over the foot.
The femoral triangle and popliteal fossa, as well as the 
posteromedial side of the ankle, are important areas of 
transition through which structures pass between regions 
(Fig. 6.3).
The femoral triangle is a pyramid-shaped depression 
formed by muscles in the proximal regions of the thigh 
and by the inguinal ligament, which forms the base of the 
triangle. The major blood supply and one of the nerves of 
the limb (femoral nerve) enter into the thigh from the 
abdomen by passing under the inguinal ligament and into 
the femoral triangle.
The popliteal fossa is posterior to the knee joint and is 
a diamond-shaped region formed by muscles of the thigh 
and leg. Major vessels and nerves pass between the thigh 
and leg through the popliteal fossa.
Most nerves, vessels, and flexor tendons that pass 
between the leg and foot pass through a series of canals 
(collectively termed the tarsal tunnel) on the posteromedial 
side of the ankle. The canals are formed by adjacent bones 
and a flexor retinaculum, which holds the tendons in 
position.
Fig. 6.3  Areas of transition. 
Inguinal ligament
Femoral triangle
Popliteal fossa
(posterior to knee)
Tarsal tunnel
Fig. 6.4  Center and line of gravity. 
Center of
gravity
Center
of gravity
posterior to
hip joint
Line of gravity
Anterior to knee
Anterior to ankle

=== PAGE 547 ===
Lower Limb
530
(movement of the dorsal side of the foot toward the leg) 
and plantarflexion (Fig. 6.6B).
During walking, many anatomical features of the lower 
limbs contribute to minimizing fluctuations in the body’s 
center of gravity and thereby reduce the amount of energy 
needed to maintain locomotion and produce a smooth, 
Movements at the hip joint are flexion, extension, 
abduction, adduction, medial and lateral rotation, and 
circumduction (Fig. 6.5).
The knee and ankle joints are primarily hinge joints. 
Movements at the knee are mainly flexion and extension 
(Fig. 6.6A). Movements at the ankle are dorsiflexion 
Fig. 6.5  Movements of the hip joint. A. Flexion and extension. B. Abduction and adduction. C. External and internal rotation. 
D. Circumduction. 
Flexion
Extension
A
B
Gluteus medius
and gluteus minimus
Abduction
Adduction
Abduction of
femur on fixed pelvis
Abduction of
pelvis on
fixed femur
C
D
Internal
rotation
External
rotation
Abduction
Adduction
Flexion
Extension

=== PAGE 548 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
6
531
Although the main movements at the knee are flexion and 
extension, the knee joint also allows the femur to rotate on 
the tibia. This rotation contributes to “locking” of the knee 
when fully extended, particularly when standing.
The leg contains two bones:
■	 The tibia is medial in position, is larger than the laterally 
positioned fibula, and is the weight-bearing bone.
■	 The fibula does not take part in the knee joint and 
forms only the most lateral part of the ankle joint—
proximally, it forms a small synovial joint (superior tib­
iofibular joint) with the inferolateral surface of the head 
of the tibia.
The tibia and fibula are linked along their lengths by an 
interosseous membrane, and at their distal ends by a 
fibrous inferior tibiofibular joint, and little movement 
occurs between them. The distal surfaces of the tibia and 
fibula together form a deep recess. The ankle joint is formed 
by this recess and part of one of the tarsal bones of the foot 
(talus), which projects into the recess. The ankle is most 
stable when dorsiflexed.
efficient gait (Fig. 6.7). They include pelvic tilt in the 
coronal plane, pelvic rotation in the transverse plane, 
movement of the knees toward the midline, flexion of the 
knees, and complex interactions between the hip, knee, 
and ankle. As a result, during walking, the body’s center 
of gravity normally fluctuates only 5 cm in both vertical 
and lateral directions.
COMPONENT PARTS
Bones and joints
The bones of the gluteal region and the thigh are the pelvic 
bone and the femur (Fig. 6.8). The large ball and socket 
joint between these two bones is the hip joint.
The femur is the bone of the thigh. At its distal end, its 
major weight-bearing articulation is with the tibia, but it 
also articulates anteriorly with the patella (knee cap). The 
patella is the largest sesamoid bone in the body and is 
embedded in the quadriceps femoris tendon.
The joint between the femur and tibia is the principal 
articulation of the knee joint, but the joint between 
the patella and femur shares the same articular cavity. 
Fig. 6.6  Movements of the knee and ankle. A. Knee flexion and extension. B. Ankle dorsiflexion and plantarflexion. 
Flexion
Extension
B
A
Dorsiflexion
Plantarflexion

=== PAGE 549 ===
Lower Limb
532
Fig. 6.7  Some of the determinants of gait. 
Pelvic rotation in transverse plane
minimizes drop in center of gravity by
effectively lengthening the limbs
Knee flexion on full stance. Limb minimizes rise in
center of gravity by effectively shortening the limb
Pelvic tilt (drop) on swing side minimizes rise in
center of gravity
Movement of knees toward midline
(adduction of hip) minimizes lateral
shift in center of gravity
Abduction on stance
side controls and
limits the drop
Lateral shift in
center of gravity
With adduction
of hip (knees
move toward
midline)
No adduction
of hip (knees do
not move toward
midline)
Vertical shift in
center of gravity
Internal rotation
of hip joint
External rotation 
of hip joint
Center of gravity with 
knee not flexed
Center of gravity with 
knee flexed
Flexion

=== PAGE 550 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
6
533
Fig. 6.8  Bones and joints of the lower limb. 
Pelvic bone
Hip joint
Femur
Knee joint
Fibula
Lateral malleolus
Medial malleolus
Ankle joint
Tibia
Patella

=== PAGE 552 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Component Parts
6
535
The interphalangeal joints are hinge joints and allow 
flexion and extension.
The bones of the foot are not organized in a single plane 
so that they lie flat on the ground. Rather, the metatarsals 
and tarsals form longitudinal and transverse arches (Fig. 
6.10). The longitudinal arch is highest on the medial side 
of the foot. The arches are flexible in nature and are sup­
ported by muscles and ligaments. They absorb and transmit 
forces during walking and standing.
Muscles
Muscles of the gluteal region consist predominantly of 
extensors, rotators, and abductors of the hip joint (Fig. 
6.11). In addition to moving the thigh on a fixed pelvis, 
these muscles also control the movement of the pelvis rela­
tive to the limb bearing the body’s weight (weight-bearing 
or stance limb) while the other limb swings forward (swing 
limb) during walking.
Fig. 6.10  Longitudinal and transverse arches of the foot. 
Medial malleolus
Medial arch
Talus
Calcaneus
Plantar calcaneonavicular ligament
Lateral malleolus
Lateral arch
Transverse arch
through metatarsals
I
II
III
IV
V
Fig. 6.11  Muscles of the gluteal region. 
Extensor
(gluteus maximus)
Abductors
(gluteus medius
and gluteus minimus)
Rotators
(piriformis, obturator
internus, gemelli,
quadratus femoris)

=== PAGE 553 ===
Lower Limb
536
Fig. 6.13  Muscle compartments in the thigh and leg. 
Anterior compartment
Anterior compartment
Femur
Posterior
compartment
Posterior compartment
Lateral 
compartment
Medial compartment
Fig. 6.12  Major flexors of the hip. 
Psoas major
Iliacus
Inguinal ligament
Hip
flexors
(iliopsoas)
Major flexor muscles of the hip (iliopsoas—psoas major 
and iliacus) do not originate in the gluteal region or the 
thigh. Instead, they are attached to the posterior abdominal 
wall and descend through the gap between the inguinal 
ligament and pelvic bone to attach to the proximal end of 
the femur (Fig. 6.12).
Muscles in the thigh and leg are separated into three 
compartments by layers of fascia, bones, and ligaments 
(Fig. 6.13).
In the thigh, there are medial (adductor), anterior 
(extensor), and posterior (flexor) compartments:
■	 Most muscles in the medial compartment act mainly on 
the hip joint.
■	 The large muscles (hamstrings) in the posterior com­
partment act on the hip (extension) and knee (flexion) 
because they attach to both the pelvis and bones of the 
leg.
■	 Muscles in the anterior compartment (quadriceps 
femoris) predominantly extend the knee.
Muscles in the leg are divided into lateral (fibular), 
anterior, and posterior compartments:
■	 Muscles in the lateral compartment predominantly 
evert the foot.
■	 Muscles in the anterior compartment dorsiflex the foot 
and extend the digits.
■	 Muscles in the posterior compartment plantarflex the 
foot and flex the digits; one of the muscles can also flex 
the knee because it attaches superiorly to the femur.
Specific muscles in each of the three compartments in 
the leg also provide dynamic support for the arches of the 
foot.
Muscles found entirely in the foot (intrinsic muscles) 
modify the forces produced by tendons entering the toes 
from the leg and provide dynamic support for the longitu­
dinal arches of the foot when walking, particularly when 
levering the body forward on the stance limb just before 
toe-off.

=== PAGE 554 ===
Conceptual Overview  •  Key Points
6
537
This gap between the pelvic bone and the inguinal liga­
ment is a weak area in the abdominal wall and often associ­
ated with abnormal protrusion of the abdominal cavity 
and contents into the thigh (femoral hernia). This type of 
hernia usually occurs where the lymphatic vessels pass 
through the gap (the femoral canal).
Pelvis
Structures within the pelvis communicate with the lower 
limb through two major apertures (Fig. 6.14).
Posteriorly, structures communicate with the gluteal 
region through the greater sciatic foramen and include:
■	 a muscle—piriformis;
■	 nerves—sciatic, superior and inferior gluteal, and 
pudendal nerves; and
■	 vessels—superior and inferior gluteal arteries and veins, 
and the internal pudendal artery.
The sciatic nerve is the largest peripheral nerve of the 
body and is the major nerve of the lower limb.
Anteriorly, the obturator nerve and vessels pass between 
the pelvis and thigh through the obturator canal. This 
canal is formed between bone at the top of the obturator 
foramen and the obturator membrane, which closes most 
of the foramen during life.
Perineum
Structures pass between the perineum and gluteal region 
through the lesser sciatic foramen (Fig. 6.14). The most 
important with respect to the lower limb is the tendon of 
the obturator internus muscle.
The nerve and artery of the perineum (the internal 
pudendal artery and pudendal nerve) pass out of the pelvis 
through the greater sciatic foramen into the gluteal region 
and then immediately pass around the ischial spine and 
sacrospinous ligament and through the lesser sciatic 
foramen to enter the perineum.
KEY POINTS
Innervation is by lumbar and sacral 
spinal nerves
Somatic motor and general sensory innervation of the 
lower limb is by peripheral nerves emanating from the 
lumbar and sacral plexuses on the posterior abdominal and 
pelvic walls. These plexuses are formed by the anterior 
rami of L1 to L3 and most of L4 (lumbar plexus) and L4 to 
S5 (sacral plexus).
Fig. 6.14  Apertures of communication between the lower limb 
and other regions. 
Obturator membrane
Lesser sciatic foramen
Greater sciatic foramen
Obturator canal
Inguinal ligament
Sacrotuberous ligament
Sacrospinous ligament
Gap between inguinal
ligament and pelvic bone
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGIONS
Unlike in the upper limb where most structures pass 
between the neck and limb through a single axillary inlet, 
in the lower limb, there are four major entry and exit points 
between the lower limb and the abdomen, pelvis, and 
perineum (Fig. 6.14). These are:
■	 the gap between the inguinal ligament and pelvic bone,
■	 the greater sciatic foramen,
■	 the obturator canal (at the top of the obturator foramen), 
and
■	 the lesser sciatic foramen.
Abdomen
The lower limb communicates directly with the abdomen 
through a gap between the pelvic bone and the inguinal 
ligament (Fig. 6.14). Structures passing though this gap 
include:
■	 muscles—psoas major, iliacus, and pectineus;
■	 nerves—femoral and femoral branch of the genitofemo­
ral nerves, and the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh;
■	 vessels—femoral artery and vein; and
■	 lymphatics.

=== PAGE 560 ===
6
543
Regional Anatomy  •  Bony Pelvis
The outer surface of the ilium, and the adjacent surfaces 
of the sacrum, coccyx, and sacrotuberous ligament are 
associated with the gluteal region of the lower limb and 
provide extensive muscle attachment. The ischial tuberos­
ity provides attachment for many of the muscles in the 
posterior compartment of the thigh, and the ischiopubic 
ramus and body of the pubis are associated mainly with 
muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh. The head 
of the femur articulates with the acetabulum on the lateral 
surface of the pelvic bone.
Ilium
The upper fan-shaped part of the ilium is associated on its 
inner side with the abdomen and on its outer side with the 
lower limb. The top of this region is the iliac crest, which 
Regional anatomy
Bony pelvis
The external surfaces of the pelvic bones, sacrum, and 
coccyx are predominantly the regions of the pelvis associ­
ated with the lower limb, although some muscles do origi­
nate from the deep or internal surfaces of these bones 
and from the deep surfaces of the lumbar vertebrae, above 
(Fig. 6.22).
Each pelvic bone is formed by three bones (ilium, 
ischium, and pubis), which fuse during childhood. The 
ilium is superior and the pubis and ischium are antero­
inferior and posteroinferior, respectively.
The ilium articulates with the sacrum. The pelvic bone 
is further anchored to the end of the vertebral column 
(sacrum and coccyx) by the sacrotuberous and sacrospi­
nous ligaments, which attach to a tuberosity and spine on 
the ischium.
Fig. 6.22  External surface of the bony pelvis. Lateral view. 
LIV spine
Horizontal plane through top of iliac crest
Anterior gluteal line
Posterior gluteal line
Posterior superior iliac spine
Sacrum
Sacrospinous ligament
Ischial spine
Sacrotuberous ligament
Posterior inferior iliac spine
Acetabulum
Ischial tuberosity
Ilium
Inferior gluteal line
Ischium
Pubis
Pubic tubercle
Iliopubic eminence
Anterior inferior iliac spine
Inguinal ligament
Anterior superior iliac spine
Anterior abdominal wall
Iliac crest
Tuberculum of iliac crest

=== PAGE 561 ===
Lower Limb
544
■	 The posterior gluteal line descends almost vertically 
from the iliac crest to a position near the posterior 
inferior iliac spine—the gluteus medius muscle attaches 
to bone between the anterior and posterior gluteal lines, 
and the gluteus maximus muscle attaches posterior to 
the posterior gluteal line.
Ischial tuberosity
The ischial tuberosity is posteroinferior to the acetabu­
lum and is associated mainly with the hamstring muscles 
of the posterior thigh (Fig. 6.23). It is divided into upper 
and lower areas by a transverse line.
The upper area of the ischial tuberosity is oriented verti­
cally and is further subdivided into two parts by an oblique 
line, which descends, from medial to lateral, across the 
surface:
■	 The more medial part of the upper area is for the attach­
ment of the combined origin of the semitendinosus 
muscle and the long head of the biceps femoris muscle.
■	 The lateral part is for the attachment of the semimem­
branosus muscle.
The lower area of the ischial tuberosity is oriented hori­
zontally and is divided into medial and lateral regions by a 
ridge of bone:
ends anteriorly as the anterior superior iliac spine and 
posteriorly as the posterior superior iliac spine. A 
prominent lateral expansion of the crest just posterior to 
the anterior superior iliac spine is the tuberculum of  the 
iliac crest.
The anterior inferior iliac spine is on the anterior margin 
of the ilium, and below this, where the ilium fuses with the 
pubis, is a raised area of bone (the iliopubic eminence).
The gluteal surface of the ilium faces posterolaterally 
and lies below the iliac crest. It is marked by three curved 
lines (inferior, anterior, and posterior gluteal lines), which 
divide the surface into four regions:
■	 The inferior gluteal line originates just superior to the 
anterior inferior iliac spine and curves inferiorly across 
the bone to end near the posterior margin of the 
acetabulum—the rectus femoris muscle attaches to the 
anterior inferior iliac spine and to a roughened patch of 
bone between the superior margin of the acetabulum 
and the inferior gluteal line.
■	 The anterior gluteal line originates from the lateral 
margin of the iliac crest between the anterior superior 
iliac spine and the tuberculum of the iliac crest, and 
arches inferiorly across the ilium to disappear just 
superior to the upper margin of the greater sciatic 
foramen—the gluteus minimus muscle originates from 
between the inferior and anterior gluteal lines.
Fig. 6.23  Ischial tuberosity. Posterolateral view. 
Acetabulum
Ischial spine
For attachment of sacrotuberous ligament
For attachment of semitendinosus and
long head of biceps femoris muscle
Covered by connective tissue and bursa
For attachment of adductor magnus muscle
For attachment of semimembranosus muscle
Ischiopubic ramus
Obturator foramen
Body of pubic bone

=== PAGE 562 ===
6
545
Regional Anatomy  •  Bony Pelvis
■	 The lateral region provides attachment for part of the 
adductor magnus muscle.
■	 The medial part faces inferiorly and is covered by con­
nective tissue and by a bursa.
When sitting, this medial part supports the body weight.
The sacrotuberous ligament is attached to a sharp ridge 
on the medial margin of the ischial tuberosity.
Ischiopubic ramus and pubic bone
The external surfaces of the ischiopubic ramus anterior to 
the ischial tuberosity and the body of the pubis provide 
attachment for muscles of the medial compartment of the 
thigh (Fig. 6.23). These muscles include the adductor 
longus, adductor brevis, adductor magnus, pectineus, and 
gracilis.
Acetabulum
The large cup-shaped acetabulum for articulation with 
the head of the femur is on the lateral surface of the pelvic 
bone in the region where the ilium, pubis, and ischium fuse 
(Fig. 6.24).
The margin of the acetabulum is marked inferiorly by a 
prominent notch (acetabular notch).
The wall of the acetabulum consists of nonarticular 
and articular parts:
■	 The nonarticular part is rough and forms a shallow 
circular depression (the acetabular fossa) in central 
and inferior parts of the acetabular floor—the acetabu­
lar notch is continuous with the acetabular fossa.
Fig. 6.24  Acetabulum. 
Lunate surface
(articular)
Acetabular
fossa
Acetabular notch
Ilium
Ischium
Pubis
■	 The articular surface is broad and surrounds the 
anterior, superior, and posterior margins of the acetabu­
lar fossa.
The smooth crescent-shaped articular surface (the 
lunate surface) is broadest superiorly where most of 
the body’s weight is transmitted through the pelvis to the 
femur. The lunate surface is deficient inferiorly at the ace­
tabular notch.
The acetabular fossa provides attachment for the liga­
ment of the head of the femur, whereas blood vessels and 
nerves pass through the acetabular notch.
In the clinic
Pelvic fractures
The pelvic bones, sacrum, and associated joints form a bony 
ring surrounding the pelvic cavity. Soft tissue and visceral 
organ damage must be suspected when the pelvis is 
fractured. Patients with multiple injuries and evidence of 
chest, abdominal, and lower limb trauma should also be 
investigated for pelvic trauma.
Pelvic fractures can be associated with appreciable blood 
loss (concealed exsanguination) and blood transfusion is 
often required. In addition, this bleeding tends to form 
a significant pelvic hematoma, which can compress 
nerves, press on organs, and inhibit pelvic visceral function 
(Fig. 6.25).
There are many ways of classifying pelvic fractures, 
which enable the surgeon to determine the appropriate 
treatment and the patient’s prognosis. Pelvic fractures are 
generally of four types.
■	 Type 1 injuries occur without disruption of the bony 
pelvic ring (e.g., a fracture of the iliac crest). These types 
of injuries are unlikely to represent significant trauma, 
though in the case of a fracture of the iliac crest, blood 
loss needs to be assessed.
■	 Type 2 injuries occur with a single break in the bony 
pelvic ring. An example of this would be a single fracture 
with diastasis (separation) of the symphysis pubis. Again, 
these injuries are relatively benign in nature, but it may 
be appropriate to assess for blood loss.
(continues)

=== PAGE 563 ===
Lower Limb
546
■	 Type 3 injuries occur with double breaks in the bony 
pelvic ring. These include bilateral fractures of the pubic 
rami, which may produce urethral damage.
■	 Type 4 injuries occur at and around the acetabulum.
Other types of pelvic ring injuries include fractures of the 
pubic rami and disruption of the sacro-iliac joint with or 
without dislocation. This may involve significant visceral 
pelvic trauma and hemorrhage.
Other general pelvic injuries include stress fractures and 
insufficiency fractures, as seen in athletes and elderly 
patients with osteoporosis, respectively.
In the clinic—cont’d
Hematoma
Fractures
Bladder
Fig. 6.25  Multiple fractures of the pelvis. Radiograph with 
contrast in the bladder. A large accumulation of blood is 
deforming the bladder. 
Proximal femur
The femur is the bone of the thigh and the longest 
bone in the body. Its proximal end is characterized by 
a head and neck, and two large projections (the greater 
and lesser trochanters) on the upper part of the shaft 
(Fig. 6.26).
The head of the femur is spherical and articulates with 
the acetabulum of the pelvic bone. It is characterized by a 
nonarticular pit (fovea) on its medial surface for the 
attachment of the ligament of the head.
The neck of the femur is a cylindrical strut of bone that 
connects the head to the shaft of the femur. It projects 
superomedially from the shaft at an angle of approximately 
125°, and projects slightly forward. The orientation of the 
neck relative to the shaft increases the range of movement 
of the hip joint.
The upper part of the shaft of the femur bears a greater 
and lesser trochanter, which are attachment sites for 
muscles that move the hip joint.
Greater and lesser trochanters
The greater trochanter extends superiorly from the shaft 
of the femur just lateral to the region where the shaft joins 
the neck of the femur (Fig. 6.26). It continues posteriorly 
where its medial surface is deeply grooved to form the 
trochanteric fossa. The lateral wall of this fossa bears a 
distinct oval depression for attachment of the obturator 
externus muscle.
The greater trochanter has an elongate ridge on its 
anterolateral surface for attachment of the gluteus 
minimus and a similar ridge more posteriorly on its lateral 
surface for attachment of the gluteus medius. Between 
these two points, the greater trochanter is palpable.
On the medial side of the superior aspect of the greater 
trochanter and just above the trochanteric fossa is a small 
impression for attachment of the obturator internus and 
its associated gemelli muscles, and immediately above and 
behind this feature is an impression on the margin of the 
trochanter for attachment of the piriformis muscle.
The lesser trochanter is smaller than the greater 
trochanter and has a blunt conical shape. It projects pos­
teromedially from the shaft of the femur just inferior to the 
junction with the neck (Fig. 6.26). It is the attachment site 
for the combined tendons of psoas major and iliacus 
muscles.
Extending between the two trochanters and separating 
the shaft from the neck of the femur are the intertrochan­
teric line and intertrochanteric crest.
Intertrochanteric line
The intertrochanteric line is a ridge of bone on the 
anterior surface of the upper margin of the shaft that 

=== PAGE 564 ===
6
547
Regional Anatomy  •  Proximal Femur
Fig. 6.26  Proximal end of the femur (right). A. Anterior view. B. Medial view. C. Posterior view. D. Lateral view. 
A
B
Trochanteric fossa
Head
Neck
Neck
Attachment site for 
piriformis muscle
Greater trochanter
Attachment site for 
gluteus minimus
Shaft
Lesser 
trochanter
Intertrochanteric 
line
Tubercle
Greater trochanter
Piriformis
Fovea
Obturator internus
Trochanteric fossa
End of intertrochanteric line
Pectineal line (spiral line)
Lesser trochanter
Oval depression for
obturator externus
Attachment of
gluteus medius
Quadrate tubercle
Greater trochanter
Fovea
Neck
Quadrate tubercle
Lesser trochanter
Pectineal line
 (spiral line)
Medial margin
 of linea aspera
Linea aspera
Lateral margin of linea aspera
Gluteal tuberosity
Attachment site for
 gluteus medius
Intertrochanteric crest
Gluteus minimus
Gluteus medius
Lesser trochanter
C
D

=== PAGE 565 ===
Lower Limb
548
The middle third of the shaft of the femur is triangular 
in shape with smooth lateral and medial margins between 
anterior, lateral (posterolateral), and medial (posterome­
dial) surfaces. The posterior margin is broad and forms a 
prominent raised crest (the linea aspera).
The linea aspera is a major site of muscle attachment in 
the thigh. In the proximal third of the femur, the medial 
and lateral margins of the linea aspera diverge and con­
tinue superiorly as the pectineal line and gluteal tuberosity, 
respectively (Fig. 6.27):
■	 The pectineal line curves anteriorly under the lesser 
trochanter and joins the intertrochanteric line.
■	 The gluteal tuberosity is a broad linear roughening that 
curves laterally to the base of the greater trochanter.
The gluteus maximus muscle is attached to the gluteal 
tuberosity.
The triangular area enclosed by the pectineal line, the 
gluteal tuberosity, and the intertrochanteric crest is the 
posterior surface of the proximal end of the femur.
descends medially from a tubercle on the anterior surface 
of the base of the greater trochanter to a position just 
anterior to the base of the lesser trochanter (Fig. 6.26). It 
is continuous with the pectineal line (spiral line), which 
curves medially under the lesser trochanter and around 
the shaft of the femur to merge with the medial margin of 
the linea aspera on the posterior aspect of the femur.
Intertrochanteric crest
The intertrochanteric crest is on the posterior surface 
of the femur and descends medially across the bone from 
the posterior margin of the greater trochanter to the base 
of the lesser trochanter (Fig. 6.26). It is a broad smooth 
ridge of bone with a prominent tubercle (the quadrate 
tubercle) on its upper half, which provides attachment for 
the quadratus femoris muscle.
Shaft of  the femur
The shaft of the femur descends from lateral to medial in 
the coronal plane at an angle of 7° from the vertical axis 
(Fig. 6.27). The distal end of the femur is therefore closer 
to the midline than the upper end of the shaft.
Fig. 6.27  Shaft of the femur. On the right is a posterior view of proximal shaft of right femur. 
Pectineal line
 (spiral line)
Linea aspera
Gluteal tuberosity
Intertrochanteric 
crest
Medial margin
Medial
Medial surface
Anterior
Anterior surface
Lateral margin
Lateral surface
Linea aspera
Posterior
Lateral
Posterior surface of
proximal femur

=== PAGE 566 ===
6
549
Regional Anatomy  •  Proximal Femur
In the clinic
Femoral neck fractures
Femoral neck fractures (Fig. 6.28) can interrupt the blood 
supply to the femoral head. The blood supply to the head 
and neck is primarily from an arterial ring formed by the 
branches of the medial and lateral circumflex femoral arteries 
around the base of the femoral neck. From here, vessels 
course along the neck, penetrate the capsule, and supply the 
femoral head. The blood supply to the femoral head and 
femoral neck is further enhanced by the artery of the 
ligamentum teres, a branch of the obturator artery, which is 
generally small and variable. Femoral neck fractures may 
disrupt associated vessels and lead to necrosis of the femoral 
head. Femoral neck fractures can be divided into three 
categories depending on the location of the fracture line: 
subcapital (fracture line passes across the femoral head-neck 
junction), transcervical (fracture line passes through the 
midportion of the femoral neck), and basicervical (fracture 
line passes across the base of the neck). Subcapital fractures 
have the highest risk of developing necrosis of the femoral 
head, and basicervical fractures have the lowest risk. Elderly 
patients with osteoporosis tend to have transverse subcapital 
fractures following low-energy trauma such as a fall from 
a standing height. Conversely, younger patients usually 
sustain more vertical fractures of the distal femoral neck 
(basicervical) after high-energy trauma such as a fall from a 
great height or due to axial load applied to an abducted 
knee, such as during a motor vehicle accident.
Fig. 6.28  This radiograph of the pelvis, anteroposterior view, 
demonstrates a fracture of the neck of the femur. 
Fractured neck of femur

=== PAGE 567 ===
Lower Limb
550
In the clinic
Femoral shaft fractures
An appreciable amount of energy is needed to fracture the 
femoral shaft. This type of injury is therefore accompanied 
by damage to the surrounding soft tissues, which include 
the muscle compartments and the structures they contain.
In the clinic
Intertrochanteric fractures
In these fractures, the break usually runs from the greater 
trochanter through to the lesser trochanter and does not 
involve the femoral neck. Intertrochanteric fractures preserve 
the femoral neck blood supply and do not render the 
femoral head ischemic. They are most commonly seen in 
the elderly and result from low-energy impact (Fig. 6.29).
Sometimes isolated fractures of the greater or the lesser 
trochanter can occur. An isolated fracture of the lesser 
trochanter in adults is most commonly pathological and due 
to an underlying malignant deposit.
Fig. 6.29  Anteroposterior radiograph showing an 
intertrochanteric fracture of proximal end of femur. 
Intertrochanteric 
fracture
Hip joint
The hip joint is a synovial articulation between the head of 
the femur and the acetabulum of the pelvic bone (Fig. 
6.30A). The joint is a multiaxial ball and socket joint 
designed for stability and weight-bearing at the expense of 
mobility. Movements at the joint include flexion, extension, 
abduction, adduction, medial and lateral rotation, and 
circumduction.
When considering the effects of muscle action on the 
hip joint, the long neck of the femur and the angulation 
of the neck on the shaft of the femur must be borne 
in mind. For example, medial and lateral rotation of the 
femur involves muscles that move the greater trochanter 
forward and backward, respectively, relative to the acetabu­
lum (Fig. 6.30B).
The articular surfaces of the hip joint are:
■	 the spherical head of the femur, and
■	 the lunate surface of the acetabulum of the pelvic bone.
The acetabulum almost entirely encompasses the hemi­
spherical head of the femur and contributes substantially 
to joint stability. The nonarticular acetabular fossa contains 
loose connective tissue. The lunate surface is covered by 
hyaline cartilage and is broadest superiorly.
Except for the fovea, the head of the femur is also covered 
by hyaline cartilage.
The rim of the acetabulum is raised slightly by a fibro­
cartilaginous collar (the acetabular labrum). Inferiorly, 
the labrum bridges across the acetabular notch as the 
transverse acetabular ligament and converts the notch 
into a foramen (Fig. 6.31A).

=== PAGE 568 ===
6
551
Regional Anatomy  •  Hip Joint
Fig. 6.30  Hip joint. A. Articular surfaces. Anterior view. B. Movement of the neck of the femur during medial and lateral rotation. Superior 
view. 
Acetabulum of 
pelvic bone
Acetabular labrum
Head of femur
Superior view
Lateral rotation
Medial rotation
A
B
Fig. 6.31  Hip joint. A. Transverse acetabular ligament. B. Ligament of the head of the femur. The head of the femur has been laterally rotated 
out of the acetabulum to show the ligament. 
A
B
Acetabular labrum 
Lunate surface
Transverse
acetabular ligament
Acetabular
foramen
Obturator foramen
Acetabular fossa
Artery of ligament of head
Synovial sleeve 
around ligament
Ligament of head of femur
Ischial tuberosity
Obturator membrane
Pubis
Pubic tubercle
Obturator artery
Acetabular branch
of obturator artery
Cut synovial membrane

=== PAGE 569 ===
Lower Limb
552
The ligament of  the head of  the femur is a flat band 
of delicate connective tissue that attaches at one end to the 
fovea on the head of the femur and at the other end to the 
acetabular fossa, transverse acetabular ligament, and 
margins of the acetabular notch (Fig. 6.31B). It carries a 
small branch of the obturator artery, which contributes to 
the blood supply of the head of the femur.
The synovial membrane attaches to the margins of the 
articular surfaces of the femur and acetabulum, forms a 
tubular covering around the ligament of the head of the 
femur, and lines the fibrous membrane of the joint (Figs. 
6.31B and 6.32). From its attachment to the margin of the 
head of the femur, the synovial membrane covers the neck 
of the femur before reflecting onto the fibrous membrane 
(Fig. 6.32).
The fibrous membrane that encloses the hip joint is 
strong and generally thick. Medially, it is attached to the 
margin of the acetabulum, the transverse acetabular liga­
ment, and the adjacent margin of the obturator foramen 
(Fig. 6.33A). Laterally, it is attached to the intertrochan­
teric line on the anterior aspect of the femur and to the 
neck of the femur just proximal to the intertrochanteric 
crest on the posterior surface.
Fig. 6.32  Synovial membrane of the hip joint. 
Synovial membrane
Line of attachment 
around head 
of femur
Membrane reflects 
back to attach to 
margin of
acetabulum
Fig. 6.33  Fibrous membrane and ligaments of the hip joint. A. Fibrous membrane of the joint capsule. Anterior view. B. Iliofemoral and 
pubofemoral ligaments. Anterior view. C. Ischiofemoral ligament. Posterior view. 
Intertrochanteric line
Anterior inferior iliac spine
Iliofemoral 
ligament
Pubofemoral ligament
Iliopubic
 eminence
Ischiofemoral ligament
A
B
C

=== PAGE 570 ===
6
553
Regional Anatomy  •  Hip Joint
Ligaments
Three ligaments reinforce the external surface of the 
fibrous membrane and stabilize the joint: the iliofemoral, 
pubofemoral, and ischiofemoral ligaments.
■	 The iliofemoral ligament is anterior to the hip joint 
and is triangular shaped (Fig. 6.33B). Its apex is attached 
to the ilium between the anterior inferior iliac spine and 
the margin of the acetabulum and its base is attached 
along the intertrochanteric line of the femur. Parts of 
the ligament attached above and below the intertro­
chanteric line are thicker than the part attached to the 
central part of the line. This results in the ligament 
having a Y appearance.
■	 The pubofemoral ligament is anteroinferior to the hip 
joint (Fig. 6.33B). It is also triangular in shape, with its 
base attached medially to the iliopubic eminence, adja­
cent bone, and obturator membrane. Laterally, it blends 
with the fibrous membrane and with the deep surface 
of the iliofemoral ligament.
■	 The ischiofemoral ligament reinforces the posterior 
aspect of the fibrous membrane (Fig. 6.33C). It is 
attached medially to the ischium, just posteroinferior to 
the acetabulum, and laterally to the greater trochanter 
deep to the iliofemoral ligament.
The fibers of all three ligaments are oriented in a spiral 
fashion around the hip joint so that they become taut when 
the joint is extended. This stabilizes the joint and reduces 
the amount of muscle energy required to maintain a 
standing position.
Vascular supply to the hip joint is predominantly 
through branches of the obturator artery, medial and 
lateral circumflex femoral arteries, superior and inferior 
gluteal arteries, and the first perforating branch of the deep 
artery of the thigh. The articular branches of these vessels 
form a network around the joint (Fig. 6.34).
The hip joint is innervated by articular branches from 
the femoral, obturator, and superior gluteal nerves, and the 
nerve to the quadratus femoris.
Fig. 6.34  Blood supply of the hip joint. 
Internal iliac artery
Common iliac artery
External iliac artery
Lateral circumflex femoral artery
1st perforating artery
Deep artery of thigh
Medial circumflex femoral artery
Femoral artery
Obturator artery
Inferior gluteal artery
Superior gluteal artery

=== PAGE 571 ===
Lower Limb
554
muscles (obturator internus and externus) attached to 
the inner and outer surfaces of the obturator membrane 
and surrounding bone.
The obturator canal connects the abdominopelvic 
region with the medial compartment of the thigh. The 
obturator nerve and vessels pass through the canal.
Greater sciatic foramen
The greater sciatic foramen is formed on the posterolat­
eral pelvic wall and is the major route for structures to pass 
between the pelvis and the gluteal region of the lower limb 
(Fig. 6.35). The margins of the foramen are formed by:
■	 the greater sciatic notch,
■	 parts of the upper borders of the sacrospinous and 
sacrotuberous ligaments, and
■	 the lateral border of the sacrum.
Gateways to the lower limb
There are four major routes by which structures pass from 
the abdomen and pelvis into and out of the lower limb. 
These are the obturator canal, the greater sciatic foramen, 
the lesser sciatic foramen, and the gap between the ingui­
nal ligament and the anterosuperior margin of the pelvis 
(Fig. 6.35).
Obturator canal
The obturator canal is an almost vertically oriented pas­
sageway at the anterosuperior edge of the obturator 
foramen (Fig. 6.35). It is bordered:
■	 above by a groove (obturator groove) on the inferior 
surface of the superior ramus of the pubic bone, and
■	 below by the upper margin of the obturator membrane, 
which fills most of the obturator foramen, and by 
Fig. 6.35  Gateways to the lower limb. 
Sacrospinous 
ligament
Sacrotuberous 
ligament
Pelvic cavity
Ilio-inguinal nerve
Abdominal cavity
Gap between inguinal 
ligament and pelvic bone:
• Psoas major, iliacus, 
   pectineus muscles
• Femoral artery
• Femoral vein
• Lymphatics
• Femoral branch of 
   genitofemoral nerve
• Lateral cutaneous 
   nerve of thigh
• Femoral nerve
Obturator canal:
• obturator nerve
• obturator vessels
Lesser sciatic foramen:
• Obturator internus muscle tendon
• Pudendal nerve and internal pudendal
   vessels pass into perineum 
   from gluteal region
Greater sciatic foramen below 
piriformis muscle:
• Sciatic nerve
• Inferior gluteal nerve, artery, vein
• Pudendal nerve
• Internal pudendal artery and vein
• Posterior femoral cutaneous nerve
• Nerve to obturator internus and 
   gemellus superior muscles
• Nerve to quadratus femoris and 
   gemellus inferior muscles
Greater sciatic foramen above
piriformis muscle:
• Superior gluteal nerve, artery, vein
Piriformis muscle

=== PAGE 572 ===
6
555
Regional Anatomy  •  Nerves
lower limb also pass through it, as does the femoral nerve, 
to enter the femoral triangle of the thigh.
Nerves
Nerves that enter the lower limb from the abdomen and 
pelvis are terminal branches of the lumbosacral plexus on 
the posterior wall of the abdomen and the posterolateral 
walls of the pelvis (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1).
The lumbar plexus is formed by the anterior rami of 
spinal nerves L1 to L3 and part of L4 (see Chapter 4, pp. 
398–401). The rest of the anterior ramus of L4 and the 
anterior ramus of L5 combine to form the lumbosacral 
trunk, which enters the pelvic cavity and joins with the 
anterior rami of S1 to S3 and part of S4 to form the sacral 
plexus (see Chapter 5, pp. 480–486).
Major nerves that originate from the lumbosacral plexus 
and leave the abdomen and pelvis to enter the lower limb 
include the femoral nerve, obturator nerve, sciatic nerve, 
superior gluteal nerve, and inferior gluteal nerve. Other 
nerves that also originate from the plexus and enter the 
lower limb to supply skin or muscle include the lateral 
cutaneous nerve of the thigh, nerve to the obturator 
internus, nerve to the quadratus femoris, posterior cutane­
ous nerve of the thigh, perforating cutaneous nerve, and 
branches of the ilio-inguinal and genitofemoral nerves.
Femoral nerve
The femoral nerve carries contributions from the anterior 
rami of L2 to L4 and leaves the abdomen by passing 
through the gap between the inguinal ligament and supe­
rior margin of the pelvis to enter the femoral triangle on 
the anteromedial aspect of the thigh (Fig. 6.35 and Table 
6.1). In the femoral triangle it is lateral to the femoral 
artery. The femoral nerve:
■	 innervates all muscles in the anterior compartment of 
the thigh,
■	 in the abdomen, gives rise to branches that innervate 
the iliacus and pectineus muscles, and
■	 innervates skin over the anterior aspect of the thigh, the 
anteromedial side of the knee, the medial side of the leg, 
and the medial side of the foot.
The piriformis muscle passes out of the pelvis into the 
gluteal region through the greater sciatic foramen and 
separates the foramen into two parts, a part above the 
muscle and a part below:
■	 The superior gluteal nerve and vessels pass through the 
greater sciatic foramen above the piriformis.
■	 The sciatic nerve, inferior gluteal nerve and vessels, 
pudendal nerve and internal pudendal vessels, posterior 
cutaneous nerve of the thigh, nerve to the obturator 
internus and gemellus superior, and nerve to the qua­
dratus femoris and gemellus inferior pass through the 
greater sciatic foramen below the muscle.
Lesser sciatic foramen
The lesser sciatic foramen is inferior to the greater 
sciatic foramen on the posterolateral pelvic wall (Fig. 
6.35). It is also inferior to the lateral attachment of the 
pelvic floor (levator ani and coccygeus muscles) to the 
pelvic wall and therefore connects the gluteal region with 
the perineum:
■	 The tendon of the obturator internus passes from the 
lateral pelvic wall through the lesser sciatic foramen 
into the gluteal region to insert on the femur.
■	 The pudendal nerve and internal pudendal vessels, 
which first exit the pelvis by passing through the greater 
sciatic foramen below the piriformis muscle, enter the 
perineum below the pelvic floor by passing around the 
ischial spine and sacrospinous ligament and medially 
through the lesser sciatic foramen.
Gap between the inguinal ligament 
and pelvic bone
The large crescent-shaped gap between the inguinal liga­
ment above and the anterosuperior margin of the pelvic 
bone below is the major route of communication between 
the abdomen and the anteromedial aspect of the thigh (Fig. 
6.35). The psoas major, iliacus, and pectineus muscles pass 
through this gap to insert onto the femur. The major blood 
vessels (femoral artery and vein) and lymphatics of the 

=== PAGE 574 ===
6
557
Regional Anatomy  •  Nerves
Obturator nerve
The obturator nerve, like the femoral nerve, originates 
from L2 to L4. It descends along the posterior abdominal 
wall, passes through the pelvic cavity and enters the thigh 
by passing through the obturator canal (Fig. 6.36 and 
Table 6.1). The obturator nerve innervates:
■	 all muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh, 
except the part of the adductor magnus muscle that 
originates from the ischium and the pectineus muscle, 
which are innervated by the sciatic and the femoral 
nerves, respectively;
■	 the obturator externus muscle; and
■	 skin on the medial side of the upper thigh.
Sciatic nerve
The sciatic nerve is the largest nerve of the body and 
carries contributions from L4 to S3. It leaves the pelvis 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle, enters and passes through the gluteal region 
(Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1), and then enters the posterior 
compartment of the thigh where it divides into its two 
major branches:
■	 the common fibular nerve, and
■	 the tibial nerve.
Posterior divisions of L4 to S2 are carried in the common 
fibular part of the nerve and the anterior divisions of L4 to 
S3 are carried in the tibial part.
The sciatic nerve innervates:
■	 all muscles in the posterior compartment of the thigh,
■	 the part of the adductor magnus originating from the 
ischium,
■	 all muscles in the leg and foot, and
■	 skin on the lateral side of the leg and the lateral side and 
sole of the foot.
Gluteal nerves
The gluteal nerves are major motor nerves of the gluteal 
region.
The superior gluteal nerve (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1) 
carries contributions from the anterior rami of L4 to S1, 
leaves the pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen above 
the piriformis muscle, and innervates:
■	 the gluteus medius and minimus muscles, and
■	 the tensor fasciae latae muscle.
The inferior gluteal nerve (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1) 
is formed by contributions from L5 to S2, leaves the 
pelvis through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the 
Branch
Spinal segments
Function: motor
Function: sensory (cutaneous)
Sciatic
L4 to S3
All muscles in the posterior compartment of 
thigh and the part of adductor magnus 
attached to the ischium; all muscles in the 
leg and foot
Skin over lateral side of leg and foot, 
and over the sole and dorsal surface 
of foot
Superior gluteal
L4 to S1
Muscles of the gluteal region (gluteus 
medius, gluteus minimus, tensor fasciae 
latae)
Inferior gluteal
L5 to S2
Muscle of the gluteal region (gluteus 
maximus)
Lateral cutaneous nerve of 
thigh
L2, L3
Parietal peritoneum in iliac fossa; skin 
over anterolateral thigh
Posterior cutaneous nerve of 
thigh
S1 to S3
Skin over gluteal fold and upper 
medial aspect of thigh and adjacent 
perineum, posterior aspect of thigh 
and upper posterior leg
Nerve to quadratus femoris
L4 to S1
Muscles of gluteal region (quadratus femoris 
and gemellus inferior)
Nerve to obturator internus
L5 to S2
Muscles of gluteal region (obturator internus 
and gemellus superior)
Perforating cutaneous nerve
S2, S3
Skin over medial aspect of 
gluteal fold
Table 6.1  Branches of the lumbosacral plexus associated with the lower limb—cont’d

=== PAGE 575 ===
Lower Limb
558
■	 The nerve to the quadratus femoris supplies the gemel­
lus inferior and quadratus femoris muscles.
Posterior cutaneous nerve of thigh
The posterior cutaneous nerve of  the thigh is formed 
by contributions from S1 to S3 and leaves the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1). It passes vertically 
through the gluteal region deep to the gluteus maximus 
and enters the posterior thigh and innervates:
■	 a longitudinal band of skin over the posterior aspect of 
the thigh that continues into the upper leg, and
■	 skin over the gluteal fold, over the upper medial part of 
the thigh and in the adjacent regions of the perineum.
Perforating cutaneous nerve
The perforating cutaneous nerve is a small sensory 
nerve formed by contributions from S2 and S3. It leaves the 
pelvic cavity by penetrating directly through the sacrotu­
berous ligament (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1) and passes 
inferiorly around the lower border of the gluteus maximus 
where it overlaps with the posterior cutaneous nerve of the 
thigh in innervating skin over the medial aspect of the 
gluteal fold.
Arteries
Femoral artery
The major artery supplying the lower limb is the femoral 
artery (Fig. 6.37), which is the continuation of the exter­
nal iliac artery in the abdomen. The external iliac artery 
becomes the femoral artery as the vessel passes under the 
inguinal ligament to enter the femoral triangle in the 
anterior aspect of the thigh. Branches supply most of the 
thigh and all of the leg and foot.
Superior and inferior gluteal arteries and 
the obturator artery
Other vessels supplying parts of the lower limb include the 
superior and inferior gluteal arteries and the obturator 
artery (Fig. 6.37).
The superior and inferior gluteal arteries originate 
in the pelvic cavity as branches of the internal iliac artery 
(see Chapter 5, pp. 489–492) and supply the gluteal region. 
The superior gluteal artery leaves the pelvis through the 
greater sciatic foramen above the piriformis muscle, and 
the inferior gluteal artery leaves through the same foramen 
but below the piriformis muscle.
piriformis muscle, and enters the gluteal region to supply 
the gluteus maximus.
Ilio-inguinal and genitofemoral nerves
Terminal sensory branches of the ilio-inguinal nerve (L1) 
and the genitofemoral nerve (L1, L2) descend into the 
upper thigh from the lumbar plexus.
The ilio-inguinal nerve originates from the superior 
part of the lumbar plexus, descends around the abdominal 
wall in the plane between the transversus abdominis and 
internal oblique muscles, and then passes through the 
inguinal canal to leave the abdominal wall through the 
superficial inguinal ring (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1). Its ter­
minal branches innervate skin on the medial side of the 
upper thigh and adjacent parts of the perineum.
The genitofemoral nerve passes anteroinferiorly 
through the psoas major muscle on the posterior abdomi­
nal wall and descends on the anterior surface of the psoas 
major (Fig. 6.36 and Table 6.1). Its genital branch inner­
vates anterior aspects of the perineum. Its femoral branch 
passes into the thigh by crossing under the inguinal liga­
ment where it is lateral to the femoral artery. It passes 
superficially to innervate skin over the upper central part 
of the anterior thigh.
Lateral cutaneous nerve of thigh
The lateral cutaneous nerve of  the thigh originates 
from L2 and L3. It leaves the abdomen either by passing 
through the gap between the inguinal ligament and the 
pelvic bone just medial to the anterior superior iliac spine 
or by passing directly through the inguinal ligament (Fig. 
6.36 and Table 6.1). It supplies skin on the lateral side of 
the thigh.
Nerve to quadratus femoris and nerve 
to obturator internus
The nerve to the quadratus femoris (L4 to S1) and the 
nerve to the obturator internus (L5 to S2) are small 
motor nerves that originate from the sacral plexus. Both 
nerves pass through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to 
the piriformis muscle and enter the gluteal region (Fig. 
6.36 and Table 6.1):
■	 The nerve to the obturator internus supplies the gemel­
lus superior muscle in the gluteal region and then loops 
around the ischial spine and enters the perineum 
through the lesser sciatic foramen to penetrate the peri­
neal surface of the obturator internus muscle.

=== PAGE 576 ===
6
559
Regional Anatomy  •  Arteries
Fig. 6.37  Arteries of the lower limb. 
Aorta
Common iliac artery
Internal iliac artery
External iliac artery
Superior gluteal artery
Femoral artery
Inferior gluteal artery
Femoral vein
Obturator artery
Obturator canal
Obturator foramen
 and membrane
Sacrospinous ligament
Sacrotuberous ligament
Inferior gluteal artery
Superior gluteal artery
Piriformis muscle
LI
LII
LIII

=== PAGE 580 ===
6
563
Regional Anatomy  •  Deep Fascia and the Saphenous Opening
■	 Most of the gluteus maximus muscle inserts into the 
posterior aspect of the iliotibial tract.
The tensor fasciae latae and gluteus maximus muscles, 
working through their attachments to the iliotibial tract, 
hold the leg in extension once other muscles have extended 
the leg at the knee joint. The iliotibial tract and its two 
associated muscles also stabilize the hip joint by preventing 
lateral displacement of the proximal end of the femur away 
from the acetabulum.
with the superficial inguinal nodes and drain into the 
external iliac nodes via vessels that pass along the medial 
side of the femoral vein as it passes under the inguinal liga­
ment. The space through which the lymphatic vessels pass 
under the inguinal ligament is the femoral canal.
Popliteal nodes
In addition to the inguinal nodes, there is a small collection 
of deep nodes posterior to the knee close to the popliteal 
vessels (Fig. 6.39). These popliteal nodes receive 
lymph from superficial vessels, which accompany the small 
saphenous vein, and from deep areas of the leg and foot. 
They ultimately drain into the deep and superficial inguinal 
nodes.
Deep fascia and the saphenous opening
Fascia lata
The outer layer of deep fascia in the lower limb forms a 
thick “stocking-like” membrane, which covers the limb 
and lies beneath the superficial fascia (Fig. 6.40A). This 
deep fascia is particularly thick in the thigh and gluteal 
region and is termed the fascia lata.
The fascia lata is anchored superiorly to bone and 
soft tissues along a line of attachment that defines the 
upper margin of the lower limb. Beginning anteriorly and 
circling laterally around the limb, this line of attachment 
includes the inguinal ligament, iliac crest, sacrum, coccyx, 
sacrotuberous ligament, inferior ramus of the pubic 
bone, body of the pubic bone, and superior ramus of the 
pubic bone.
Inferiorly, the fascia lata is continuous with the deep 
fascia of the leg.
Iliotibial tract
The fascia lata is thickened laterally into a longitudinal 
band (the iliotibial tract), which descends along the 
lateral margin of the limb from the tuberculum of the iliac 
crest to a bony attachment just below the knee (Fig. 6.40B).
The superior aspect of the fascia lata in the gluteal 
region splits anteriorly to enclose the tensor fasciae latae 
muscle and posteriorly to enclose the gluteus maximus 
muscle:
■	 The tensor fasciae latae muscle is partially enclosed by 
and inserts into the superior and anterior aspects of the 
iliotibial tract.
Fig. 6.40  Fascia lata. A. Right limb. Anterior view. B. Lateral view. 
A
B
Inguinal ligament
Inguinal ligament
Deep fascia of leg
Fascia lata
Saphenous opening
Anterior superior iliac spine
Anterior superior
 iliac spine
Tuberculum
 of iliac crest
Fascia lata
Gluteus maximus
Tensor fascia lata
Iliotibial tract
Pubic tubercle
Pubic tubercle

=== PAGE 581 ===
Lower Limb
564
■	 The lateral margin is the medial margin of the sartorius 
muscle in the anterior compartment of the thigh.
■	 The floor of the triangle is formed medially by the pec­
tineus and adductor longus muscles in the medial 
compartment of the thigh and laterally by the iliopsoas 
muscle descending from the abdomen.
■	 The apex of the femoral triangle points inferiorly and is 
continuous with a fascial canal (adductor canal), 
which descends medially down the thigh and posteriorly 
through an aperture in the lower end of one of the 
largest of the adductor muscles in the thigh (the adduc­
tor magnus muscle) to open into the popliteal fossa 
behind the knee.
The femoral nerve, artery, and vein and lymphatics 
pass between the abdomen and lower limb under the 
Saphenous opening
The fascia lata has one prominent aperture on the anterior 
aspect of the thigh just inferior to the medial end of the 
inguinal ligament (the saphenous opening), which 
allows the great saphenous vein to pass from superficial 
fascia through the deep fascia to connect with the femoral 
vein (Fig. 6.41).
The margin of the saphenous opening is formed by the 
free medial edge of the fascia lata as it descends from the 
inguinal ligament and spirals around the lateral side of 
the great saphenous vein and medially under the femoral 
vein to attach to the pectineal line (pecten pubis) of the 
pelvic bone.
Femoral triangle
The femoral triangle is a wedge-shaped depression formed 
by muscles in the upper thigh at the junction between the 
anterior abdominal wall and the lower limb (Fig. 6.42):
■	 The base of the triangle is the inguinal ligament.
■	 The medial border is the medial margin of the adductor 
longus muscle in the medial compartment of the thigh.
Fig. 6.41  Saphenous ring. Anterior view. 
Pelvic inlet
Anterior superior
 iliac spine
Inguinal ligament
Femoral vein
Fascia lata
Saphenous ring
Great saphenous vein
Pubic tubercle
Pubic symphysis
Pubic bone
Pectineal line
External iliac vein
Fig. 6.42  Boundaries of the femoral triangle. 
Inguinal ligament
Sartorius muscle
Pectineus muscle
Femoral triangle
Adductor hiatus
Gracilis muscle
Adductor magnus muscle
Adductor longus muscle
Pubic symphysis
Femoral triangle
Adductor canal

=== PAGE 582 ===
6
565
Regional Anatomy  •  Femoral Triangle
inguinal ligament and in the femoral triangle (Fig. 6.43). 
The femoral artery and vein pass inferiorly through the 
adductor canal and become the popliteal vessels behind the 
knee where they meet and are distributed with branches 
of the sciatic nerve, which descends through the posterior 
thigh from the gluteal region.
From lateral to medial, major structures in the femoral 
triangle are the femoral nerve, the femoral artery, the 
femoral vein, and lymphatic vessels. The femoral artery 
can be palpated in the femoral triangle just inferior to the 
inguinal ligament and midway between the anterior supe­
rior iliac spine and the pubic symphysis.
Femoral sheath
In the femoral triangle, the femoral artery and vein and the 
associated lymphatic vessels are surrounded by a funnel-
shaped sleeve of fascia (the femoral sheath). The sheath 
is continuous superiorly with the transversalis fascia and 
iliac fascia of the abdomen and merges inferiorly with con­
nective tissue associated with the vessels. Each of the three 
structures surrounded by the sheath is contained within a 
separate fascial compartment within the sheath. The most 
medial compartment (the femoral canal) contains the 
lymphatic vessels and is conical in shape. The opening of 
this canal superiorly is potentially a weak point in the lower 
abdomen and is the site for femoral hernias. The femoral 
nerve is lateral to and not contained within the femoral 
sheath.
Fig. 6.43  Contents of the femoral triangle. 
Aorta
Psoas major
Femoral nerve
Inguinal ligament
Femoral vein
Femoral artery
Adductor canal
Popliteal artery
 behind knee
Femoral sheath
Lymphatics
in femoral canal
Pubic 
symphysis
Inferior vena cava
Femoral nerve
Femoral artery
Femoral vein
Lymphatics
Pubic tubercle
Pubic
symphysis
Inguinal ligament
Anterior iliac spine
Adductor longus
Sartorius
In the clinic
Vascular access to the lower limb
Deep and inferior to the inguinal ligament are the femoral 
artery and femoral vein. The femoral artery is palpable as 
it passes over the femoral head and may be easily 
demonstrated using ultrasound. If arterial or venous 
access is needed rapidly, a physician can use the femoral 
approach to these vessels.
Many radiological procedures involve catheterization of 
the femoral artery or the femoral vein to obtain access to 
the contralateral lower limb, the ipsilateral lower limb, the 
vessels of the thorax and abdomen, and the cerebral 
vessels.
Cardiologists also use the femoral artery to place 
catheters in vessels around the arch of the aorta and into 
the coronary arteries to perform coronary angiography 
and angioplasty.
Access to the femoral vein permits catheters to be 
maneuvered into the renal veins, the gonadal veins, the 
right atrium, and the right side of the heart, including the 
pulmonary artery and distal vessels of the pulmonary tree. 
Access to the superior vena cava and the great veins of 
the neck is also possible.

=== PAGE 583 ===
Lower Limb
566
Fig. 6.44  Gluteal region. Posterior view. 
Quadrate 
tubercle
Gluteal tuberosity
Lesser sciatic 
foramen
Sacrospinous ligament
Sacrotuberous ligament
Greater sciatic foramen
GLUTEAL REGION
The gluteal region lies posterolateral to the bony pelvis and 
proximal end of the femur (Fig. 6.44). Muscles in the 
region mainly abduct, extend, and laterally rotate the 
femur relative to the pelvic bone.
The gluteal region communicates anteromedially with 
the pelvic cavity and perineum through the greater sciatic 
foramen and lesser sciatic foramen, respectively. Inferiorly, 
it is continuous with the posterior thigh.
The sciatic nerve enters the lower limb from the pelvic 
cavity by passing through the greater sciatic foramen and 
descending through the gluteal region into the posterior 
thigh and then into the leg and foot.
The pudendal nerve and internal pudendal vessels pass 
between the pelvic cavity and perineum by passing first 
through the greater sciatic foramen to enter the gluteal 
region and then immediately passing through the lesser 
sciatic foramen to enter the perineum. The nerve to the 
obturator internus and gemellus superior follows a similar 
course. Other nerves and vessels that pass through the 
greater sciatic foramen from the pelvic cavity supply struc­
tures in the gluteal region itself.
Muscles
Muscles of the gluteal region (Table 6.2) are composed 
mainly of two groups:
■	 a deep group of small muscles, which are mainly lateral 
rotators of the femur at the hip joint and include the 
piriformis, obturator internus, gemellus superior, 
gemellus inferior, and quadratus femoris;
■	 a more superficial group of larger muscles, which 
mainly abduct and extend the hip and include the 
gluteus minimus, gluteus medius, and gluteus maximus; 
an additional muscle in this group, the tensor fasciae 
latae, stabilizes the knee in extension by acting on a 
specialized longitudinal band of deep fascia (the iliotibial 
tract) that passes down the lateral side of the thigh to 
attach to the proximal end of the tibia in the leg.
Many of the important nerves in the gluteal region are 
in the plane between the superficial and deep groups of 
muscles.

=== PAGE 584 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Gluteal Region
6
567
Table 6.2  Muscles of the gluteal region (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Piriformis
Anterior surface of sacrum 
between anterior sacral 
foramina
Medial side of superior border 
of greater trochanter of femur
Branches from S1 
and S2
Laterally rotates the extended 
femur at hip joint; abducts 
flexed femur at hip joint
Obturator internus
Anterolateral wall of true pelvis; 
deep surface of obturator 
membrane and surrounding 
bone
Medial side of greater 
trochanter of femur
Nerve to obturator 
internus (L5, S1)
Laterally rotates the extended 
femur at hip joint; abducts 
flexed femur at hip joint
Gemellus superior
External surface of ischial spine
Along length of superior 
surface of the obturator 
internus tendon and into the 
medial side of greater 
trochanter of femur with 
obturator internus tendon
Nerve to obturator 
internus (L5, S1)
Laterally rotates the extended 
femur at hip joint; abducts 
flexed femur at hip joint
Gemellus inferior
Upper aspect of ischial 
tuberosity
Along length of inferior 
surface of the obturator 
internus tendon and into the 
medial side of greater 
trochanter of femur with 
obturator internus tendon
Nerve to quadratus 
femoris (L5, S1)
Laterally rotates the extended 
femur at hip joint; abducts 
flexed femur at hip joint
Quadratus femoris
Lateral aspect of the ischium 
just anterior to the ischial 
tuberosity
Quadrate tubercle on the 
intertrochanteric crest of the 
proximal femur
Nerve to quadratus 
femoris (L5, S1)
Laterally rotates femur at hip 
joint
Gluteus minimus
External surface of ilium 
between inferior and anterior 
gluteal lines
Linear facet on the 
anterolateral aspect of the 
greater trochanter
Superior gluteal 
nerve (L4, L5, S1)
Abducts femur at hip joint; 
holds pelvis secure over stance 
leg and prevents pelvic drop 
on the opposite swing side 
during walking; medially 
rotates thigh
Gluteus medius
External surface of ilium 
between anterior and posterior 
gluteal lines
Elongate facet on the lateral 
surface of the greater 
trochanter
Superior gluteal 
nerve (L4, L5, S1)
Abducts femur at hip joint; 
holds pelvis secure over stance 
leg and prevents pelvic drop 
on the opposite swing side 
during walking; medially 
rotates thigh
Gluteus maximus
Fascia covering gluteus medius, 
external surface of ilium behind 
posterior gluteal line, fascia of 
erector spinae, dorsal surface of 
lower sacrum, lateral margin of 
coccyx, external surface of 
sacrotuberous ligament
Posterior aspect of iliotibial 
tract of fascia lata and gluteal 
tuberosity of proximal femur
Inferior gluteal 
nerve (L5, S1, S2)
Powerful extensor of flexed 
femur at hip joint; lateral 
stabilizer of hip joint and knee 
joint; laterally rotates and 
abducts thigh
Tensor fasciae latae
Lateral aspect of crest of ilium 
between anterior superior iliac 
spine and tubercle of the crest
Iliotibial tract of fascia lata
Superior gluteal 
nerve (L4, L5, S1)
Stabilizes the knee in 
extension

=== PAGE 585 ===
Lower Limb
568
Obturator internus
The obturator internus muscle, like the piriformis 
muscle, is a muscle of the pelvic wall and of the gluteal 
region (Fig. 6.45). It is a flat fan-shaped muscle originating 
from the medial surface of the obturator membrane and 
adjacent bone of the obturator foramen (see Chapter 5, pp. 
442–443). Because the pelvic floor attaches to a thickened 
band of fascia across the medial surface of the obturator 
internus, the obturator internus forms:
■	 the anterolateral wall of the pelvic cavity above the 
pelvic floor, and
■	 the lateral wall of the ischio-anal fossa in the perineum 
below the pelvic floor.
The muscle fibers of the obturator internus converge to 
form a tendon, which bends 90° around the ischium 
between the ischial spine and ischial tuberosity and passes 
through the lesser sciatic foramen to enter the gluteal 
region. The tendon then passes posteroinferiorly to the hip 
joint and attaches to the medial surface of the superior 
Deep group
Piriformis
The piriformis muscle is the most superior of the deep 
group of muscles (Fig. 6.45) and is a muscle of the pelvic 
wall and of the gluteal region (see Chapter 5, p. 443). It 
originates from between the anterior sacral foramina on 
the anterolateral surface of the sacrum and passes laterally 
and inferiorly through the greater sciatic foramen.
In the gluteal region, the piriformis passes posterior to 
the hip joint and attaches to a facet on the upper margin 
of the greater trochanter of the femur.
The piriformis externally rotates and abducts the femur 
at the hip joint and is innervated in the pelvic cavity by the 
nerve to the piriformis, which originates as branches from 
S1 and S2 of the sacral plexus (see Chapter 5, p. 485).
In addition to its action on the hip joint, the piriformis 
is an important landmark because it divides the greater 
sciatic foramen into two regions, one above and one below 
the piriformis. Vessels and nerves pass between the pelvis 
and gluteal region by passing through the greater sciatic 
foramen either above or below the piriformis.
Fig. 6.45  Deep muscles in the gluteal region. A. Posterior view. B. Function. 
A
B
Gemellus 
superior
 Gemellus inferior
Obturator 
internus
Quadratus femoris
Gluteus medius
Gluteus minimus
Greater sciatic 
foramen above
piriformis
Piriformis muscle
Greater sciatic 
foramen below
piriformis
Contraction of gluteus 
minimus and medius
on stance side prevents 
excessive pelvic tilt
during swing phase 
on opposite side  

=== PAGE 586 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Gluteal Region
6
569
The gluteus minimus is a fan-shaped muscle that 
originates from the external surface of the expanded upper 
part of the ilium, between the inferior gluteal line and the 
anterior gluteal line. The muscle fibers converge inferiorly 
and laterally to form a tendon, which inserts into a broad 
linear facet on the anterolateral aspect of the greater 
trochanter.
The gluteus medius overlies the gluteus minimus and 
is also fan shaped. It has a broad origin from the external 
surface of the ilium between the anterior gluteal line and 
posterior gluteal line and inserts on an elongate facet on 
the lateral surface of the greater trochanter.
The gluteus medius and minimus muscles abduct the 
lower limb at the hip joint and reduce pelvic drop over the 
opposite swing limb during walking by securing the posi­
tion of the pelvis on the stance limb (Fig. 6.45B). Both 
muscles are innervated by the superior gluteal nerve.
margin of the greater trochanter of the femur just inferior 
to the attachment of the piriformis muscle.
The obturator internus laterally rotates and abducts the 
femur at the hip joint and is innervated by the nerve to the 
obturator internus.
Gemellus superior and inferior
The gemellus superior and inferior (gemelli is Latin for 
“twins”) are a pair of triangular muscles associated with 
the upper and lower margins of the obturator internus 
tendon (Fig. 6.45):
■	 The base of the gemellus superior originates from the 
gluteal surface of the ischial spine.
■	 The base of the gemellus inferior originates from the 
upper gluteal and pelvic surfaces of the ischial 
tuberosity.
Fibers of the gemellus muscles attach along the length 
of the obturator internus tendon, and the apices of the two 
muscles insert with the tendon of the obturator internus 
on the greater trochanter of the femur.
The gemellus superior is innervated by the nerve to the 
obturator internus, and the gemellus inferior is innervated 
by the nerve to the quadratus femoris. The gemellus 
muscles act with the obturator internus muscle to laterally 
rotate and abduct the femur at the hip joint.
Quadratus femoris
The quadratus femoris muscle is the most inferior of the 
deep group of muscles in the gluteal region (Fig. 6.45). It 
is a flat rectangular muscle below the obturator internus 
muscle and its associated gemellus muscles.
The quadratus femoris is attached at one end to a linear 
roughening on the lateral aspect of the ischium just ante­
rior to the ischial tuberosity and at the other end to the 
quadrate tubercle on the intertrochanteric crest of the 
proximal femur.
The quadratus femoris laterally rotates the femur at the 
hip joint and is innervated by the nerve to the quadratus 
femoris.
Superficial group
Gluteus minimus and medius
The gluteus minimus and medius muscles are two 
muscles of the more superficial group in the gluteal region 
(Fig. 6.45).
In the clinic
Trendelenburg’s sign
Trendelenburg’s sign occurs in people with weak or 
paralyzed abductor muscles (gluteus medius and gluteus 
minimus) of the hip. The sign is demonstrated by asking 
the patient to stand on one limb. When the patient stands 
on the affected limb, the pelvis severely drops over the 
swing limb.
Positive signs are typically found in patients with 
damage to the superior gluteal nerve. Damage to this 
nerve may occur with associated pelvic fractures, with 
space-occupying lesions within the pelvis extending into 
the greater sciatic foramen, and in some cases relating to 
hip surgery during which there has been disruption of and 
subsequent atrophy of the insertion of the gluteus medius 
and gluteus minimus tendons on the greater trochanter.
In patients with a positive Trendelenburg’s sign, gait 
also is abnormal. Typically during the stance phase of the 
affected limb, the weakened abductor muscles allow the 
pelvis to tilt inferiorly over the swing limb. The patient 
compensates for the pelvic drop by lurching the trunk to 
the affected side to maintain the level of the pelvis 
throughout the gait cycle.

=== PAGE 587 ===
Lower Limb
570
it also stabilizes the knee and hip joints. It is innervated by 
the inferior gluteal nerve.
Tensor fasciae latae
The tensor fasciae latae muscle is the most anterior of the 
superficial group of muscles in the gluteal region and 
overlies the gluteus minimus and the anterior part of the 
gluteus medius (Fig. 6.47).
The tensor fasciae latae originates from the outer margin 
of the iliac crest from the anterior superior iliac spine to 
approximately the tuberculum of the iliac crest. The muscle 
Gluteus maximus
The gluteus maximus is the largest muscle in the gluteal 
region and overlies most of the other gluteal muscles (Fig. 
6.46).
The gluteus maximus is quadrangular in shape and has 
a broad origin extending from a roughened area of the 
ilium behind the posterior gluteal line and along the dorsal 
surface of the lower sacrum and the lateral surface of the 
coccyx to the external surface of the sacrotuberous liga­
ment. It is also attached to fascia overlying the gluteus 
medius muscle and, between the ilium and sacrum, to 
fascia covering the erector spinae muscle, and is often 
described as being enclosed within two layers of the fascia 
lata, which covers the thigh and gluteal region.
Laterally, the upper and superficial lower parts of the 
gluteus maximus insert into the posterior aspect of a ten­
dinous thickening of the fascia lata (the iliotibial tract), 
which passes over the lateral surface of the greater tro­
chanter and descends down the thigh and into the upper 
leg. Deep distal parts of the muscle attach to the elongate 
gluteal tuberosity of the proximal femur.
The gluteus maximus mainly extends the flexed thigh at 
the hip joint. Through its insertion into the iliotibial tract, 
Fig. 6.46  Gluteus maximus muscle. Posterior view. 
Gluteus medius
Gluteus maximus
Attachment of 
gluteus maximus 
to iliotibial tract
Iliotibial tract
Attachment of deep
 fibers to gluteal
 tuberosity
Fig. 6.47  Tensor fasciae latae. Left gluteal region, lateral view. 
Tensor fasciae latae
Tubercle of
 crest of ilium
Gluteus medius
Iliotibial tract
Gluteus minimus
Gluteus maximus
Fascia lata
Deep fascia of leg
Tibia
Attachment to tibia

=== PAGE 588 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Gluteal Region
6
571
areas. Nerves such as the superior and inferior gluteal 
nerves innervate structures in the gluteal region. Many of 
the nerves in the gluteal region are in the plane between 
the superficial and deep groups of muscles.
Superior gluteal nerve
Of all the nerves that pass through the greater sciatic 
foramen, the superior gluteal nerve is the only one that 
passes above the piriformis muscle (Fig. 6.48). After enter­
ing the gluteal region, the nerve loops up over the inferior 
margin of the gluteus minimus and travels anteriorly and 
laterally in the plane between the gluteus minimus and 
medius muscles.
The superior gluteal nerve supplies branches to the 
gluteus minimus and medius muscles and terminates by 
innervating the tensor fasciae latae muscle.
Sciatic nerve
The sciatic nerve enters the gluteal region through the 
greater sciatic foramen inferior to the piriformis muscle 
(Fig. 6.48). It descends in the plane between the superficial 
and deep group of gluteal region muscles, crossing the 
posterior surfaces of first the obturator internus and asso­
ciated gemellus muscles and then the quadratus femoris 
fibers descend to insert into the anterior aspect of the 
iliotibial tract of deep fascia, which runs down the lateral 
side of the thigh and attaches to the upper tibia. Like the 
gluteus maximus muscle, the tensor fasciae latae is enclosed 
within a compartment of the fascia lata.
The tensor fasciae latae stabilizes the knee in extension 
and, working with the gluteus maximus muscle on the 
iliotibial tract lateral to the greater trochanter, stabilizes 
the hip joint by holding the head of the femur in the ace­
tabulum (Fig. 6.47). It is innervated by the superior gluteal 
nerve.
Nerves
Seven nerves enter the gluteal region from the pelvis 
through the greater sciatic foramen (Fig. 6.48): the supe­
rior gluteal nerve, sciatic nerve, nerve to the quadratus 
femoris, nerve to the obturator internus, posterior cutane­
ous nerve of the thigh, pudendal nerve, and inferior gluteal 
nerve.
An additional nerve, the perforating cutaneous nerve, 
enters the gluteal region by passing directly through the 
sacrotuberous ligament.
Some of these nerves, such as the sciatic and pudendal 
nerves, pass through the gluteal region en route to other 
Fig. 6.48  Nerves of the gluteal region. Posterior view.  
Superior gluteal nerve
Tensor fasciae latae muscle
Inferior gluteal nerve
Iliotibial tract
Posterior cutaneous nerve of thigh
Nerve to quadratus femoris
muscle (deep to gemelli,
 obturator internus, and
 quadratus femoris)
Gluteus maximus
Perforating cutaneous nerve
Nerve to obturator internus
Pudendal nerve
Piriformis muscle
Sciatic nerve

=== PAGE 589 ===
Lower Limb
572
region just deep to the gluteus maximus and enters the 
posterior thigh.
The posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh has a 
number of gluteal branches, which loop around the lower 
margin of the gluteus maximus muscle to innervate skin 
over the gluteal fold. A small perineal branch passes medi­
ally to contribute to the innervation of the skin of the 
scrotum or labia majora in the perineum. The main trunk 
of the posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh passes infe­
riorly, giving rise to branches that innervate the skin on the 
posterior thigh and leg.
Pudendal nerve
The pudendal nerve enters the gluteal region through the 
greater sciatic foramen inferior to the piriformis muscle 
and medial to the sciatic nerve (Fig. 6.48). It passes over 
the sacrospinous ligament and immediately passes through 
the lesser sciatic foramen to enter the perineum. The course 
of the pudendal nerve in the gluteal region is short and the 
nerve is often hidden by the overlying upper margin of the 
sacrotuberous ligament.
The pudendal nerve is the major somatic nerve of the 
perineum and has no branches in the gluteal region.
Inferior gluteal nerve
The inferior gluteal nerve enters the gluteal region 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle and along the posterior surface of the sciatic 
nerve (Fig. 6.48). It penetrates and supplies the gluteus 
maximus muscle.
Perforating cutaneous nerve
The perforating cutaneous nerve is the only nerve in the 
gluteal region that does not enter the area through the 
greater sciatic foramen. It is a small nerve that leaves 
the sacral plexus in the pelvic cavity by piercing the sacro­
tuberous ligament. It then loops around the lower border 
of the gluteus maximus to supply the skin over the medial 
aspect of the gluteus maximus (Fig. 6.48).
muscle. It lies just deep to the gluteus maximus at the 
midpoint between the ischial tuberosity and the greater 
trochanter. At the lower margin of the quadratus femoris 
muscle, the sciatic nerve enters the posterior thigh.
The sciatic nerve is the largest nerve in the body and 
innervates all muscles in the posterior compartment of 
the thigh that flex the knee and all muscles that work the 
ankle and foot. It also innervates a large area of skin in the 
lower limb.
Nerve to quadratus femoris
The nerve to the quadratus femoris enters the gluteal 
region through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the 
piriformis muscle and deep to the sciatic nerve (Fig. 6.48). 
Unlike other nerves in the gluteal region, the nerve to the 
quadratus femoris lies anterior to the plane of the deep 
muscles.
The nerve to the quadratus femoris descends along the 
ischium deep to the tendon of the obturator internus 
muscle and associated gemellus muscles to penetrate and 
innervate the quadratus femoris. It supplies a small branch 
to the gemellus inferior.
Nerve to obturator internus
The nerve to the obturator internus enters the gluteal 
region through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to 
the piriformis muscle and between the posterior cutane­
ous nerve of the thigh and the pudendal nerve (Fig. 6.48). 
It supplies a small branch to the gemellus superior 
and then passes over the ischial spine and through 
the lesser sciatic foramen to innervate the obturator 
internus muscle from the medial surface of the muscle in 
the perineum.
Posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh
The posterior cutaneous nerve of the thigh enters the 
gluteal region through the greater sciatic foramen inferior 
to the piriformis muscle and immediately medial to the 
sciatic nerve (Fig. 6.48). It descends through the gluteal 

=== PAGE 590 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Gluteal Region
6
573
In the clinic
Intramuscular injections
From time to time it is necessary to administer drugs 
intramuscularly, that is, by direct injection into muscles. This 
procedure must be carried out without injuring 
neurovascular structures. A typical site for an intramuscular 
injection is the gluteal region. The sciatic nerve passes 
through this region and needs to be avoided. The safest 
place to inject is the upper outer quadrant of either gluteal 
region.
The gluteal region can be divided into quadrants by two 
imaginary lines positioned using palpable bony landmarks 
(Fig. 6.49). One line descends vertically from the highest 
point of the iliac crest. Another line is horizontal and passes 
through the first line midway between the highest point of 
the iliac crest and the horizontal plane through the ischial 
tuberosity.
It is important to remember that the gluteal region 
extends as far forward as the anterior superior iliac spine. 
The sciatic nerve curves through the upper lateral corner of 
the lower medial quadrant and descends along the medial 
margin of the lower lateral quadrant.
Occasionally, the sciatic nerve bifurcates into its tibial and 
common fibular branches in the pelvis, in which case the 
common fibular nerve passes into the gluteal region 
through, or even above, the piriformis muscle.
The superior gluteal nerve and vessels normally enter the 
gluteal region above the piriformis and pass superiorly and 
forward.
The anterior corner of the upper lateral quadrant is 
normally used for injections to avoid injuring any part of the 
sciatic nerve or other nerves and vessels in the gluteal 
region. A needle placed in this region enters the gluteus 
medius anterosuperior to the margin of the gluteus 
maximus.
Fig. 6.49  Site for intramuscular injections in the gluteal region. 
Highest point 
on iliac crest
Safe injection 
site
Upper lateral 
quadrant
Horizontal line
Lower lateral 
quadrant
Plane through 
ischial 
tuberosity
Gluteal fold
Ischial
 tuberosity
Lower medial
 quadrant
Upper medial
 quadrant
Vertical line

=== PAGE 591 ===
Lower Limb
574
Superior gluteal artery
The superior gluteal artery originates from the posterior 
trunk of the internal iliac artery in the pelvic cavity. It 
leaves the pelvic cavity with the superior gluteal nerve 
through the greater sciatic foramen above the piriformis 
muscle (Fig. 6.50). In the gluteal region, it divides into a 
superficial branch and a deep branch:
■	 The superficial branch passes onto the deep surface of 
the gluteus maximus muscle.
■	 The deep branch passes between the gluteus medius and 
minimus muscles.
In addition to adjacent muscles, the superior gluteal 
artery contributes to the supply of the hip joint. Branches 
of the artery also anastomose with the lateral and medial 
femoral circumflex arteries from the deep femoral artery in 
the thigh, and with the inferior gluteal artery (Fig. 6.51).
Arteries
Two arteries enter the gluteal region from the pelvic cavity 
through the greater sciatic foramen, the inferior gluteal 
artery and the superior gluteal artery (Fig. 6.50). They 
supply structures in the gluteal region and posterior thigh 
and have important collateral anastomoses with branches 
of the femoral artery.
Inferior gluteal artery
The inferior gluteal artery originates from the anterior 
trunk of the internal iliac artery in the pelvic cavity. It 
leaves the pelvic cavity with the inferior gluteal nerve 
through the greater sciatic foramen inferior to the pirifor­
mis muscle (Fig. 6.50).
The inferior gluteal artery supplies adjacent muscles 
and descends through the gluteal region and into the 
posterior thigh where it supplies adjacent structures and 
anastomoses with perforating branches of the femoral 
artery. It also supplies a branch to the sciatic nerve.
Fig. 6.50  Arteries of the gluteal region. 
Deep branch
Lateral femoral 
circumflex artery
Medial femoral 
circumflex artery
First perforating artery from
deep artery of thigh
Inferior gluteal
 artery and vein
Superficial branch
Superior gluteal 
artery and vein
Piriformis muscle
Fig. 6.51  Anastomoses between gluteal arteries and vessels 
originating from the femoral artery in the thigh. Posterior view. 
Superior gluteal artery
First perforating artery
Second perforating artery
Third perforating artery
Femoral artery
Deep artery of thigh
Medial femoral 
circumflex artery
Lateral femoral
circumflex artery
Inferior gluteal artery

=== PAGE 592 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
575
■	 Anteriorly, it is separated from the abdominal wall by 
the inguinal ligament.
■	 Posteriorly, it is separated from the gluteal region by the 
gluteal fold superficially, and by the inferior margins 
of the gluteus maximus and quadratus femoris on 
deeper planes.
Structures enter and leave the top of the thigh by three 
routes:
■	 Posteriorly, the thigh is continuous with the gluteal 
region and the major structure passing between the two 
regions is the sciatic nerve.
■	 Anteriorly, the thigh communicates with the abdominal 
cavity through the aperture between the inguinal liga­
ment and pelvic bone, and major structures passing 
through this aperture are the iliopsoas and pectineus 
muscles; the femoral nerve, artery, and vein; and lym­
phatic vessels.
Veins
Inferior and superior gluteal veins follow the inferior and 
superior gluteal arteries into the pelvis where they join the 
pelvic plexus of veins. Peripherally, the veins anastomose 
with superficial gluteal veins, which ultimately drain 
anteriorly into the femoral vein.
Lymphatics
Deep lymphatic vessels of the gluteal region accompany 
the blood vessels into the pelvic cavity and connect with 
internal iliac nodes.
Superficial lymphatics drain into the superficial inguinal 
nodes on the anterior aspect of the thigh.
THIGH
The thigh is the region of the lower limb that is approxi­
mately between the hip and knee joints (Fig. 6.52):
Fig. 6.52  Thigh. A. Posterior view. B. Anterior view. C. Cross section through the midthigh. 
A
B
C
Inguinal ligament
Abdominal wall
Gap between inguinal ligament 
and pelvic bone
Obturator canal
Anterior superior iliac spine
Pubic tubercle
Medial
Anterior
Lateral
 Posterior 
Anterior 
compartment
Posterior 
compartment
Medial
 compartment
Popliteal fossa
(posterior to knee)
Popliteal fossa
Sciatic nerve
Quadratus femoris
Inferior margin
 of gluteus
 maximus
Gluteal fold

=== PAGE 593 ===
Lower Limb
576
In proximal and distal regions of the femur, the linea 
aspera widens to form an additional posterior surface. At 
the distal end of the femur, this posterior surface forms the 
floor of the popliteal fossa, and its margins form the medial 
and lateral supracondylar lines. The medial supracon­
dylar line terminates at a prominent tubercle (the adduc­
tor tubercle) on the superior aspect of the medial 
condyle of the distal end. Just lateral to the lower end of 
the medial supracondylar line is an elongate roughened 
area of bone for the proximal attachment of the medial 
head of the gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 6.52).
The distal end of the femur is characterized by two large 
condyles, which articulate with the proximal head of the 
tibia. The condyles are separated posteriorly by an inter­
condylar fossa and are joined anteriorly where they 
articulate with the patella.
The surfaces of the condyles that articulate with the 
tibia are rounded posteriorly and become flatter inferiorly. 
On each condyle, a shallow oblique groove separates the 
surface that articulates with the tibia from the more ante­
rior surface that articulates with the patella. The surfaces 
of the medial and lateral condyles that articulate with 
the patella form a V-shaped trench, which faces anteriorly. 
The lateral surface of the trench is larger and steeper 
than the medial surface.
The walls of the intercondylar fossa bear two facets for 
the superior attachment of the cruciate ligaments, which 
stabilize the knee joint (Fig. 6.53):
■	 The wall formed by the lateral surface of the medial 
condyle has a large oval facet, which covers most of the 
inferior half of the wall, for attachment of the proximal 
end of the posterior cruciate ligament.
■	 The wall formed by the medial surface of the lateral 
condyle has a posterosuperior smaller oval facet for 
attachment of the proximal end of the anterior cruci­
ate ligament.
Epicondyles, for the attachment of collateral ligaments 
of the knee joint, are bony elevations on the nonarticular 
outer surfaces of the condyles (Fig. 6.53). Two facets sepa­
rated by a groove are just posterior to the lateral 
epicondyle:
■	 The upper facet is for attachment of the lateral head 
of the gastrocnemius muscle.
■	 The inferior facet is for attachment of the popliteus 
muscle.
The tendon of the popliteus muscle lies in the groove 
separating the two facets.
■	 Medially, structures (including the obturator nerve and 
associated vessels) pass between the thigh and pelvic 
cavity through the obturator canal.
The thigh is divided into three compartments by inter­
muscular septa between the posterior aspect of the femur 
and the fascia lata (the thick layer of deep fascia that 
completely surrounds or invests the thigh; Fig. 6.52C):
■	 The anterior compartment of  the thigh contains 
muscles that mainly extend the leg at the knee joint.
■	 The posterior compartment of  the thigh contains 
muscles that mainly extend the thigh at the hip joint 
and flex the leg at the knee joint.
■	 The medial compartment of  the thigh consists 
of muscles that mainly adduct the thigh at the hip 
joint.
The sciatic nerve innervates muscles in the posterior 
compartment of the thigh, the femoral nerve innervates 
muscles in the anterior compartment of the thigh, and the 
obturator nerve innervates most muscles in the medial 
compartment of the thigh.
The major artery, vein, and lymphatic channels enter 
the thigh anterior to the pelvic bone and pass through the 
femoral triangle inferior to the inguinal ligament. Vessels 
and nerves passing between the thigh and leg pass through 
the popliteal fossa posterior to the knee joint.
Bones
The skeletal support for the thigh is the femur. Most of the 
large muscles in the thigh insert into the proximal ends of 
the two bones of the leg (tibia and fibula) and flex and 
extend the leg at the knee joint. The distal end of the femur 
provides origin for the gastrocnemius muscles, which are 
predominantly in the posterior compartment of the leg and 
plantarflex the foot.
Shaft and distal end of femur
The shaft of the femur is bowed forward and has an oblique 
course from the neck of the femur to the distal end (Fig. 
6.53). As a consequence of this oblique orientation, 
the knee is close to the midline under the body’s center 
of gravity.
The middle part of the shaft of the femur is triangular 
in cross section (Fig. 6.53D). In the middle part of the shaft, 
the femur has smooth medial (posteromedial), lateral 
(posterolateral), and anterior surfaces and medial, lateral, 
and posterior borders. The medial and lateral borders are 
rounded, whereas the posterior border forms a broad 
roughened crest—the linea aspera.

=== PAGE 594 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
577
Fig. 6.53  Shaft and distal end of femur. A. Lateral view. B. Anterior view. C. Posterior view. D. Cross section through shaft of femur. 
Lateral epicondyle
Medial
 epicondyle
Medial condyle
Lateral  
border
Lateral
(posterolateral)
surface
Medial
(posteromedial)
surface
Medial
border
Lateral condyle
Lateral 
epicondyle
Facet for attachment 
of lateral head of 
gastrocnemius
Facet for attachment 
of the tendon of 
popliteus muscle
Facet for attachment
of the tendon of
popliteus muscle
Adductor
 tubercle
Adductor 
tubercle
Patellar surface
Posterior surface
Medial supracondylar line
Lateral supracondylar line
Intercondylar fossa
Facet for attachment of 
posterior cruciate ligament
Facet for attachment of
 anterior cruciate ligament
Roughened area 
for attachment 
of medial head 
of gastrocnemius 
muscle
Facet for attachment
of lateral head of
gastrocnemius muscle
Linea aspera
Linea aspera
Anterior 
surface
A
B
C
D

=== PAGE 595 ===
Lower Limb
578
Fig. 6.54  Patella. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. C. Superior view. 
A
B
Quadriceps
tendon
Medial
Lateral
Lateral
Patellar ligament
C
Medial
Distal end
of femur
Lateral
Patella
The medial epicondyle is a rounded eminence on the 
medial surface of the medial condyle. Just posterosuperior 
to the medial epicondyle is the adductor tubercle.
Patella
The patella (knee cap) is the largest sesamoid bone (a 
bone formed within the tendon of a muscle) in the body 
and is formed within the tendon of the quadriceps femoris 
muscle as it crosses anterior to the knee joint to insert on 
the tibia.
The patella is triangular:
■	 Its apex is pointed inferiorly for attachment to the 
patellar ligament, which connects the patella to the tibia 
(Fig. 6.54).
■	 Its base is broad and thick for the attachment of the 
quadriceps tendon from above.
■	 Its posterior surface articulates with the femur and has 
medial and lateral facets, which slope away from a 
raised smooth ridge—the lateral facet is larger than the 
medial facet for articulation with the larger correspond­
ing surface on the lateral condyle of the femur.

=== PAGE 596 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
579
Fig. 6.55  Proximal end of the tibia. A. Superior view, tibial plateau. B. Anterior view. C. Posterior view. D. Cross section through the shaft 
of tibia. 
A
Intercondylar region
Attachment of posterior cruciate ligament
Posterior attachment of lateral meniscus
Area of articulation with lateral meniscus
Anterior attachment of lateral meniscus
Attachment of anterior cruciate ligament
Tuberosity
Tubercles of intercondylar eminence
Roughened and perforated area
Anterior attachment of medial meniscus
Area of articulation with medial meniscus
Posterior attachment of medial meniscus
B
C
Lateral condyle
Roughened and 
perforated area
Site of attachment of sartorius, 
gracilis, and semitendinosus muscles
Shaft of tibia
Groove
Tibial tuberosity
Medial condyle
Anterior attachment of
medial meniscus
Tubercles of intercondylar eminence
Anterior 
Anterior border
Lateral surface
Interosseous
 border
Posterior surface
Posterior
Medial 
border
Medial 
surface
Attachment of medial meniscus
Attachment of posterior 
cruciate ligament
Soleal line
Articular facet for 
proximal head of 
fibula
D
Proximal end of tibia
The tibia is the medial and larger of the two bones in the 
leg, and is the only one that articulates with the femur at 
the knee joint.
The proximal end of the tibia is expanded in the trans­
verse plane for weight-bearing and consists of a medial 
condyle and a lateral condyle, which are both flattened 
in the horizontal plane and overhang the shaft (Fig. 6.55).
The superior surfaces of the medial and lateral condyles 
are articular and separated by an intercondylar region, 
which contains sites of attachment for strong ligaments 
(cruciate ligaments) and interarticular cartilages (menisci) 
of the knee joint.
The articular surfaces of the medial and lateral condyles 
and the intercondylar region together form a “tibial 
plateau,” which articulates with and is anchored to the 
distal end of the femur. Inferior to the condyles on the 
proximal part of the shaft is a large tibial tuberosity and 
roughenings for muscle and ligament attachments.
Tibial condyles and intercondylar areas
The tibial condyles are thick horizontal discs of bone 
attached to the top of the tibial shaft (Fig. 6.55).
The medial condyle is larger than the lateral condyle 
and is better supported over the shaft of the tibia. Its supe­
rior surface is oval for articulation with the medial condyle 

=== PAGE 597 ===
Lower Limb
580
numerous small nutrient foramina for blood vessels. This 
region is continuous with a similar surface on the front of 
the tibia above the tuberosity and lies against infrapatellar 
connective tissue.
Tibial tuberosity
The tibial tuberosity is a palpable inverted triangular 
area on the anterior aspect of the tibia below the site of 
junction between the two condyles (Fig. 6.55). It is the site 
of attachment for the patellar ligament, which is a 
continuation of the quadriceps femoris tendon below the 
patella.
Shaft of  tibia
The shaft of the tibia is triangular in cross section and has 
three surfaces (posterior, medial, and lateral) and three 
borders (anterior, interosseous, and medial) (Fig. 6.55D):
■	 The anterior border is sharp and descends from the 
tibial tuberosity where it is continuous superiorly with 
a ridge that passes along the lateral margin of the 
tuberosity and onto the lateral condyle.
■	 The interosseous border is a subtle vertical ridge that 
descends along the lateral aspect of the tibia from the 
region of bone anterior and inferior to the articular 
facet for the head of the fibula.
■	 The medial border is indistinct superiorly where it 
begins at the anterior end of the groove on the posterior 
surface of the medial tibial condyle, but is sharp in 
midshaft.
The large medial surface of the shaft of the tibia, 
between the anterior and medial borders, is smooth and 
subcutaneous, and is palpable along almost its entire 
extent. Medial and somewhat inferior to the tibial tuberos­
ity, this medial surface bears a subtle, slightly roughened 
elongate elevation. This elevation is the site of the combined 
attachment of three muscles (sartorius, gracilis, and semi­
tendinosus), which descend from the thigh.
The posterior surface of the shaft of the tibia, 
between the interosseous and medial borders, is widest 
superiorly where it is crossed by a roughened oblique line 
(the soleal line).
The lateral surface, between the anterior and interos­
seous borders, is smooth and unremarkable.
Proximal end of fibula
The fibula is the lateral bone of the leg and does not take 
part in formation of the knee joint or in weight-bearing. It 
is much smaller than the tibia and has a small proximal 
head, a narrow neck, and a delicate shaft, which ends as 
the lateral malleolus at the ankle.
of the femur. The articular surface extends laterally onto 
the side of the raised medial intercondylar tubercle.
The superior surface of the lateral condyle is circular 
and articulates above with the lateral condyle of the femur. 
The medial edge of this surface extends onto the side of the 
lateral intercondylar tubercle.
The superior articular surfaces of both the lateral and 
medial condyles are concave, particularly centrally. The 
outer margins of the surfaces are flatter and are the regions 
in contact with the interarticular discs (menisci) of fibro­
cartilage in the knee joint.
The nonarticular posterior surface of the medial 
condyle bears a distinct horizontal groove for part of the 
attachment of the semimembranosus muscle, and the 
undersurface of the lateral condyle bears a distinct 
circular facet for articulation with the proximal head of 
the fibula.
The intercondylar region of the tibial plateau lies 
between the articular surfaces of the medial and lateral 
condyles (Fig. 6.55). It is narrow centrally where it is raised 
to form the intercondylar eminence, the sides of which 
are elevated further to form medial and lateral intercondy­
lar tubercles.
The intercondylar region bears six distinct facets for the 
attachment of menisci and cruciate ligaments. The ante­
rior intercondylar area widens anteriorly and bears three 
facets:
■	 The most anterior facet is for attachment of the anterior 
end (horn) of the medial meniscus.
■	 Immediately posterior to the most anterior facet is a 
facet for the attachment of the anterior cruciate 
ligament.
■	 A small facet for the attachment of the anterior end 
(horn) of the lateral meniscus is just lateral to the site 
of attachment of the anterior cruciate ligament.
The posterior intercondylar area also bears three 
attachment facets:
■	 The most anterior is for attachment of the posterior 
horn of the lateral meniscus.
■	 Posteromedial to the most anterior facet is the site 
of attachment for the posterior horn of the medial 
meniscus.
■	 Behind the site of attachment for the posterior horn of 
the medial meniscus is a large facet for the attachment 
of the posterior cruciate ligament.
In addition to these six sites of attachment for menisci 
and cruciate ligaments, a large anterolateral region of the 
anterior intercondylar area is roughened and perforated by 

=== PAGE 598 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
581
Fig. 6.56  Proximal end of the fibula. A. Anterior view. 
B. Cross section through the shaft of fibula. 
A
B
Apex
Attachment site for fibular
 collateral ligament of knee
Attachment site for tendon
 of biceps femoris muscle
Common fibular nerve
Lateral surface
Shaft
Medial surface
Medial part 
of posterior 
surface
Neck
Facet for articulation
with inferior surface
of lateral condyle 
of tibia
Head
Interosseous
border
Posterior border
Lateral surface
Anterior border
Medial surface
Posterior surface
Medial crest on
posterior surface
■	 The posterior border is rounded and descends from 
the region of the styloid process of the head.
■	 The interosseous border is medial in position.
The three surfaces of the fibula are associated with the 
three muscular compartments (lateral, posterior, and 
anterior) of the leg.
Muscles
Muscles of the thigh are arranged in three compartments 
separated by intermuscular septa (Fig. 6.57).
The anterior compartment of  the thigh contains 
the sartorius and the four large quadriceps femoris muscles 
(rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus medialis, and vastus 
intermedius). All are innervated by the femoral nerve. 
In addition, the terminal ends of the psoas major and 
iliacus muscles pass into the upper part of the anterior 
compartment from sites of origin on the posterior abdomi­
nal wall. These muscles are innervated by branches directly 
from the anterior rami of L1 to L3 (psoas major) or 
from the femoral nerve (iliacus) as it passes down the 
abdominal wall.
The medial compartment of  the thigh contains six 
muscles (gracilis, pectineus, adductor longus, adductor 
brevis, adductor magnus, and obturator externus). All 
except the pectineus, which is innervated by the femoral 
nerve, and part of the adductor magnus, which is inner­
vated by the sciatic nerve, are innervated by the obturator 
nerve.
The posterior compartment of  the thigh contains 
three large muscles termed the “hamstrings.” All are 
innervated by the sciatic nerve.
The head of the fibula is a globe-shaped expansion at 
the proximal end of the fibula (Fig. 6.56). A circular facet 
on the superomedial surface is for articulation above with 
a similar facet on the inferior aspect of the lateral condyle 
of the tibia. Just posterolateral to this facet, the bone pro­
jects superiorly as a blunt apex (styloid process).
The lateral surface of the head of the fibula bears a large 
impression for the attachment of the biceps femoris muscle. 
A depression near the upper margin of this impression is 
for attachment of the fibular collateral ligament of the 
knee joint.
The neck of the fibula separates the expanded head 
from the shaft. The common fibular nerve lies against the 
posterolateral aspect of the neck.
Like the tibia, the shaft of the fibula has three borders 
(anterior, posterior, and interosseous) and three surfaces 
(lateral, posterior, and medial), which lie between the 
borders (Fig. 6.56):
■	 The anterior border is sharp midshaft and begins 
superiorly from the anterior aspect of the head.
Fig. 6.57  Transverse section through the midthigh. 
Anterior
Posterior
Anterior
compartment
Deep fascia
Lateral
Intermuscular septae
Posterior
compartment
Linea aspera
Medial
compartment
Medial

=== PAGE 599 ===
Lower Limb
582
Table 6.3  Muscles of the anterior compartment of thigh (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Psoas major
Posterior abdominal wall (lumbar 
transverse processes, intervertebral 
discs, and adjacent bodies from TXII 
to LV and tendinous arches 
between these points)
Lesser trochanter of femur
Anterior rami 
(L1, L2, L3)
Flexes the thigh at the hip 
joint
Iliacus
Posterior abdominal wall (iliac fossa)
Lesser trochanter of femur
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3)
Flexes the thigh at the hip 
joint
Vastus medialis
Femur—medial part of 
intertrochanteric line, pectineal line, 
medial lip of the linea aspera, 
medial supracondylar line
Quadriceps femoris tendon 
and medial border of patella
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3, L4)
Extends the leg at the knee 
joint
Vastus intermedius
Femur—upper two-thirds of 
anterior and lateral surfaces
Quadriceps femoris tendon, 
lateral margin of patella, and 
lateral condyle of tibia
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3, L4)
Extends the leg at the knee 
joint
Vastus lateralis
Femur—lateral part of 
intertrochanteric line, margin of 
greater trochanter, lateral margin of 
gluteal tuberosity, lateral lip of the 
linea aspera
Quadriceps femoris tendon 
and lateral margin of patella
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3, L4)
Extends the leg at the knee 
joint
Rectus femoris
Straight head originates from the 
anterior inferior iliac spine; reflected 
head originates from the ilium just 
superior to the acetabulum
Quadriceps femoris tendon
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3, L4)
Flexes the thigh at the hip 
joint and extends the leg at 
the knee joint
Sartorius
Anterior superior iliac spine
Medial surface of tibia just 
inferomedial to tibial 
tuberosity
Femoral nerve 
(L2, L3)
Flexes the thigh at the hip 
joint and flexes the leg at 
the knee joint
In the clinic
Compartment syndrome
Compartment syndrome occurs when there is swelling 
within a fascial enclosed muscle compartment in 
the limbs. Typical causes include limb trauma, 
intracompartment hemorrhage, and limb compression. As 
pressure within the compartment elevates, capillary blood 
flow and tissue perfusion is compromised, which can 
ultimately lead to neuromuscular damage if not treated.
Anterior compartment
Muscles in the anterior compartment (Table 6.3) act on the 
hip and knee joints:
■	 the psoas major and iliacus act on the hip joint,
■	 the sartorius and rectus femoris act on both the hip and 
knee joints, and
■	 the vastus muscles act on the knee joint.

=== PAGE 600 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
583
Iliopsoas—psoas major and iliacus
The psoas major and iliacus muscles originate on the 
posterior abdominal wall and descend into the upper part 
of the anterior compartment of the thigh through the 
lateral half of the gap between the inguinal ligament and 
the pelvic bone (Fig. 6.58).
Although the iliacus and psoas major originate as sepa­
rate muscles in the abdomen, both insert by a common 
tendon onto the lesser trochanter of the femur and together 
are usually referred to as the iliopsoas muscle.
The iliopsoas is a powerful flexor of the thigh at the hip 
joint and can also contribute to lateral rotation of the 
thigh. The psoas major is innervated by branches from the 
anterior rami of L1 to L3 and the iliacus is innervated by 
branches from the femoral nerve in the abdomen.
Fig. 6.58  Psoas major and iliacus muscles. 
Psoas major
Iliacus
Inguinal ligament
Anterior inferior iliac spine
Anterior superior
 iliac spine
Lesser trochanter
TXII
LI
LII
LIII
LIV
LV

=== PAGE 601 ===
Lower Limb
584
vastus muscles insert into the margins of the patella as well 
as into the quadriceps femoris tendon, they stabilize the 
position of the patella during knee joint movement.
The quadriceps femoris is innervated by the femoral 
nerve with contributions mainly from spinal segments L3 
and L4. A tap with a tendon hammer on the patellar liga­
ment therefore tests reflex activity mainly at spinal cord 
levels L3 and L4.
Quadriceps femoris—vastus medialis, 
intermedius, and lateralis and rectus femoris
The large quadriceps femoris muscle consists of three 
vastus muscles (vastus medialis, vastus intermedius, and 
vastus lateralis) and the rectus femoris muscle (Fig. 6.59).
The quadriceps femoris muscle mainly extends the leg 
at the knee joint, but the rectus femoris component also 
assists flexion of the thigh at the hip joint. Because the 
Fig. 6.59  Muscles of the anterior compartment of thigh. 
Sartorius
Sartorius
Straight head of rectus femoris
Reflected head of rectus femoris
Vastus lateralis
Rectus femoris
Vastus medialis
Quadriceps femoris tendon
Patella
Patellar ligament
Pes anserinus
Sartorius
Gracilis
Semitendinosus
Attachment of
 pes anserinus
Tibial tuberosity
Patellar ligament
Quadriceps femoris tendon
Suprapatellar bursa
Articularis genus
Vastus medialis
Rectus femoris
Vastus intermedius
Vastus lateralis
Sartorius
Posterior compartment of thigh
Vastus lateralis
Vastus medialis
Vastus intermedius
Medial compartment of thigh
Adductor canal

=== PAGE 602 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
585
■	 the other from a roughened area of the ilium immedi­
ately superior to the acetabulum (reflected head) 
(Fig. 6.59).
The two heads of the rectus femoris unite to form an 
elongate muscle belly, which lies anterior to the vastus 
intermedius muscle and between the vastus lateralis and 
vastus medialis muscles, to which it is attached on either 
side. At the distal end, the rectus femoris muscle converges 
on the quadriceps femoris tendon and inserts on the base 
of the patella.
Patellar ligament
The patellar ligament is functionally the continuation of 
the quadriceps femoris tendon below the patella and is 
attached above to the apex and margins of the patella and 
below to the tibial tuberosity (Fig. 6.59). The more super­
ficial fibers of the quadriceps femoris tendon and the patel­
lar ligament are continuous over the anterior surface of 
the patella, and lateral and medial fibers are continuous 
with the ligament beside the margins of the patella.
Sartorius
The sartorius muscle is the most superficial muscle in the 
anterior compartment of the thigh and is a long strap-like 
muscle that descends obliquely through the thigh from the 
anterior superior iliac spine to the medial surface of the 
proximal shaft of the tibia (Fig. 6.59). Its flat aponeurotic 
insertion into the tibia is immediately anterior to the inser­
tion of the gracilis and semitendinosus muscles.
The sartorius, gracilis, and semitendinosus muscles 
attach to the tibia in a three-pronged pattern on the tibia, 
so their combined tendons of insertion are often termed 
the pes anserinus (Latin for “goose foot”).
In the upper one-third of the thigh, the medial margin 
of the sartorius forms the lateral margin of the femoral 
triangle.
In the middle one-third of the thigh, the sartorius forms 
the anterior wall of the adductor canal.
The sartorius muscle assists in flexing the thigh at the 
hip joint and the leg at the knee joint. It also abducts the 
thigh and rotates it laterally, as when resting the foot on 
the opposite knee when sitting.
The sartorius is innervated by the femoral nerve.
Vastus muscles
The vastus muscles originate from the femur, whereas the 
rectus femoris muscle originates from the pelvic bone. All 
attach first to the patella by the quadriceps femoris tendon 
and then to the tibia by the patellar ligament.
The vastus medialis originates from a continuous line 
of attachment on the femur, which begins anteromedially 
on the intertrochanteric line and continues posteroinferi­
orly along the pectineal line and then descends along the 
medial lip of the linea aspera and onto the medial supra­
condylar line. The fibers converge onto the medial aspect 
of the quadriceps femoris tendon and the medial border of 
the patella (Fig. 6.59).
The vastus intermedius originates mainly from the 
upper two-thirds of the anterior and lateral surfaces of the 
femur and the adjacent intermuscular septum (Fig. 6.59). 
It merges into the deep aspect of the quadriceps femoris 
tendon and also attaches to the lateral margin of the 
patella and lateral condyle of the tibia.
A tiny muscle (articularis genus) originates from the 
femur just inferior to the origin of the vastus intermedius 
and inserts into the suprapatellar bursa associated with the 
knee joint (Fig. 6.59). This articular muscle, which is often 
part of the vastus intermedius muscle, pulls the bursa 
away from the knee joint during extension.
The vastus lateralis is the largest of the vastus muscles 
(Fig. 6.59). It originates from a continuous line of attach­
ment, which begins anterolaterally from the superior part 
of the intertrochanteric line of the femur and then circles 
laterally around the bone to attach to the lateral margin of 
the gluteal tuberosity and continues down the upper part 
of the lateral lip of the linea aspera. Muscle fibers converge 
mainly onto the quadriceps femoris tendon and the lateral 
margin of the patella.
Rectus femoris
Unlike the vastus muscles, which cross only the knee joint, 
the rectus femoris muscle crosses both the hip and the 
knee joints (Fig. 6.59).
The rectus femoris has two tendinous heads of origin 
from the pelvic bone:
■	 one from the anterior inferior iliac spine (straight 
head), and

=== PAGE 603 ===
Lower Limb
586
Table 6.4  Muscles of the medial compartment of thigh (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Gracilis
A line on the external surfaces of 
the body of the pubis, the 
inferior pubic ramus, and the 
ramus of the ischium
Medial surface of proximal 
shaft of tibia
Obturator nerve (L2, L3)
Adducts thigh at hip joint 
and flexes leg at knee 
joint
Pectineus
Pectineal line (pecten pubis) and 
adjacent bone of pelvis
Oblique line extending from 
base of lesser trochanter to 
linea aspera on posterior 
surface of proximal femur
Femoral nerve (L2, L3)
Adducts and flexes thigh 
at hip joint
Adductor longus
External surface of body of pubis 
(triangular depression inferior to 
pubic crest and lateral to pubic 
symphysis)
Linea aspera on middle 
one-third of shaft of femur
Obturator nerve (anterior 
division) (L2, L3, L4)
Adducts and medially 
rotates thigh at hip joint
Adductor brevis
External surface of body of pubis 
and inferior pubic ramus
Posterior surface of proximal 
femur and upper one-third of 
linea aspera
Obturator nerve (L2, L3)
Adducts and medially 
rotates thigh at hip joint
Adductor magnus
Adductor part—ischiopubic 
ramus
Posterior surface of proximal 
femur, linea aspera, medial 
supracondylar line
Obturator nerve (L2, L3, 
L4)
Adducts and medially 
rotates thigh at hip joint
Hamstring part—ischial 
tuberosity
Adductor tubercle and 
supracondylar line
Sciatic nerve (tibial 
division) (L2, L3, L4)
Obturator externus
External surface of obturator 
membrane and adjacent bone
Trochanteric fossa
Obturator nerve (posterior 
division) (L3, L4)
Laterally rotates thigh at 
hip joint
Medial compartment
There are six muscles in the medial compartment of the 
thigh (Table 6.4): gracilis, pectineus, adductor longus, 
adductor brevis, adductor magnus, and obturator externus 
(Fig. 6.60). Collectively, all these muscles except the obtu­
rator externus mainly adduct the thigh at the hip joint; the 
adductor muscles may also medially rotate the thigh. 
Obturator externus is a lateral rotator of the thigh at the 
hip joint.
Gracilis
The gracilis is the most superficial of the muscles in the 
medial compartment of thigh and descends almost verti­
cally down the medial side of the thigh (Fig. 6.60). It is 
attached above to the outer surface of the ischiopubic 
ramus of the pelvic bone and below to the medial surface 
of the proximal shaft of the tibia, where it lies sandwiched 
between the tendon of sartorius in front and the tendon of 
the semitendinosus behind.

=== PAGE 605 ===
Lower Limb
588
external surface of the body of the pubis just inferior to 
the pubic crest and lateral to the pubic symphysis (Fig. 
6.61). It expands as it descends posterolaterally to insert 
via an aponeurosis into the middle third of the linea 
aspera.
The adductor longus contributes to the floor of the 
femoral triangle, and its medial margin forms the medial 
border of the femoral triangle. The muscle also forms the 
proximal posterior wall of the adductor canal.
The adductor longus adducts and medially rotates the 
thigh at the hip joint and is innervated by the anterior 
division of the obturator nerve.
Adductor brevis
The adductor brevis lies posterior to the pectineus and 
adductor longus. It is a triangular muscle attached at its 
apex to the body of the pubis and inferior pubic ramus just 
Pectineus
The pectineus is a flat quadrangular muscle (Fig. 6.61). 
It is attached above to the pectineal line of the pelvic bone 
and adjacent bone, and descends laterally to attach to an 
oblique line extending from the base of the lesser trochan­
ter to the linea aspera on the posterior surface of the proxi­
mal femur.
From its origin on the pelvic bone, the pectineus passes 
into the thigh below the inguinal ligament and forms part 
of the floor of the medial half of the femoral triangle.
The pectineus adducts and flexes the thigh at the hip 
joint and is innervated by the femoral nerve.
Adductor longus
The adductor longus is a flat fan-shaped muscle that 
originates from a small rough triangular area on the 
Fig. 6.61  Pectineus, adductor longus, and adductor brevis muscles. Anterior view. 
Pectineal line
Pectineal line
Pectineus
Adductor brevis
Adductor longus
Adductor magnus
Adductor brevis
For perforating arteries

=== PAGE 606 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
589
superior to the origin of the gracilis muscle (Fig. 6.61). The 
muscle is attached by its expanded base via an aponeurosis 
to a vertical line extending from lateral to the insertion of 
the pectineus into the upper aspect of the linea aspera 
lateral to the attachment of the adductor longus.
The adductor brevis adducts and medially rotates the 
thigh at the hip joint and is innervated by the obturator 
nerve.
Adductor magnus
The adductor magnus is the largest and deepest of the 
muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh (Fig. 
6.62). The muscle forms the distal posterior wall of the 
adductor canal. Like the adductor longus and brevis 
muscles, the adductor magnus is a triangular or fan-shaped 
muscle anchored by its apex to the pelvis and attached by 
its expanded base to the femur.
On the pelvis, the adductor magnus is attached along a 
line that extends from the inferior pubic ramus, above 
the attachments of the adductor longus and brevis 
muscles, and along the ramus of the ischium to the ischial 
tuberosity. The part of the muscle that originates from the 
ischiopubic ramus expands laterally and inferiorly to insert 
on the femur along a vertical line of attachment that 
extends from just inferior to the quadrate tubercle and 
medial to the gluteal tuberosity, along the linea aspera and 
onto the medial supracondylar line. This lateral part of the 
muscle is often termed the “adductor part” of the adductor 
magnus.
The medial part of the adductor magnus, often called 
the “hamstring part,” originates from the ischial tuberosity 
of the pelvic bone and descends almost vertically along the 
thigh to insert via a rounded tendon into the adductor 
tubercle on the medial condyle of the distal head of the 
femur. It also inserts via an aponeurosis up onto the medial 
supracondylar line. A large circular gap inferiorly between 
the hamstring and adductor parts of the muscle is the 
adductor hiatus (Fig. 6.62), which allows the femoral 
artery and associated veins to pass between the adductor 
canal on the anteromedial aspect of the thigh and the 
popliteal fossa posterior to the knee.
The adductor magnus adducts and medially rotates the 
thigh at the hip joint. The adductor part of the muscle is 
innervated by the obturator nerve and the hamstring part 
is innervated by the tibial division of the sciatic nerve.
Obturator externus
The obturator externus is a flat fan-shaped muscle. Its 
expansive body is attached to the external aspect of the 
Fig. 6.62  Adductor magnus and obturator externus muscles. 
Anterior view. 
Obturator externus
Adductor magnus
 (adductor part)
Adductor magnus
 (hamstring part)
Adductor tubercle
Adductor hiatus
Perforations for
   branches of deep
   artery of thigh
• Terminal end of
   deep artery of thigh
obturator membrane and adjacent bone (Fig. 6.62). The 
muscle fibers converge posterolaterally to form a tendon, 
which passes posterior to the hip joint and neck of the 
femur to insert on an oval depression on the lateral wall of 
the trochanteric fossa.
The obturator externus externally rotates the thigh at 
the hip joint and is innervated by the posterior branch of 
the obturator nerve.

=== PAGE 607 ===
Lower Limb
590
Posterior compartment
There are three long muscles in the posterior compartment 
of the thigh: biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semi­
membranosus (Table 6.5)—and they are collectively 
known as the hamstrings (Fig. 6.63). All except the short 
head of the biceps femoris cross both the hip and knee 
joints. As a group, the hamstrings flex the leg at the knee 
joint and extend the thigh at the hip joint. They are also 
rotators at both joints.
Biceps femoris
The biceps femoris muscle is lateral in the posterior 
compartment of the thigh and has two heads (Fig. 6.63):
■	 The long head originates with the semitendinosus 
muscle from the inferomedial part of the upper area of 
the ischial tuberosity.
■	 The short head arises from the lateral lip of the linea 
aspera on the shaft of the femur.
The muscle belly of the long head crosses the posterior 
thigh obliquely from medial to lateral and is joined by the 
short head distally. Together, fibers from the two heads 
form a tendon, which is palpable on the lateral side of the 
distal thigh. The main part of the tendon inserts into 
the lateral surface of the head of the fibula. Extensions 
from the tendon blend with the fibular collateral ligament 
and with ligaments associated with the lateral side of the 
knee joint.
The biceps femoris flexes the leg at the knee joint. The 
long head also extends and laterally rotates the hip. When 
Table 6.5  Muscles of the posterior compartment of thigh (spinal segments in bold are the major segments innervating the muscle)
Muscle
Origin
Insertion
Innervation
Function
Biceps femoris
Long head—inferomedial 
part of the upper area of 
the ischial tuberosity; short 
head—lateral lip of linea 
aspera
Head of fibula
Sciatic nerve 
(L5, S1, S2)
Flexes leg at knee joint; extends and 
laterally rotates thigh at hip joint and 
laterally rotates leg at knee joint
Semitendinosus
Inferomedial part of the 
upper area of the ischial 
tuberosity
Medial surface of proximal 
tibia
Sciatic nerve 
(L5, S1, S2)
Flexes leg at knee joint and extends 
thigh at hip joint; medially rotates thigh 
at hip joint and leg at knee joint
Semimembranosus
Superolateral impression 
on the ischial tuberosity
Groove and adjacent bone on 
medial and posterior surface of 
medial tibial condyle
Sciatic nerve 
(L5, S1, S2)
Flexes leg at knee joint and extends 
thigh at hip joint; medially rotates thigh 
at hip joint and leg at knee joint
the knee is partly flexed, the biceps femoris can laterally 
rotate the leg at the knee joint.
The long head is innervated by the tibial division of the 
sciatic nerve and the short head is innervated by the 
common fibular division of the sciatic nerve.
Semitendinosus
The semitendinosus muscle is medial to the biceps 
femoris muscle in the posterior compartment of the thigh 
(Fig. 6.63). It originates with the long head of the biceps 
femoris muscle from the inferomedial part of the upper 
area of the ischial tuberosity. The spindle-shaped muscle 
belly ends in the lower half of the thigh and forms a long 
cord-like tendon, which lies on the semimembranosus 
muscle and descends to the knee. The tendon curves 
around the medial condyle of the tibia and inserts into 
the medial surface of the tibia just posterior to the tendons 
of the gracilis and sartorius muscles as part of the pes 
anserinus.
The semitendinosus flexes the leg at the knee joint 
and extends the thigh at the hip joint. Working with 
the semimembranosus, it also medially rotates the thigh 
at the hip joint and medially rotates the leg at the knee 
joint.
The semitendinosus muscle is innervated by the tibial 
division of the sciatic nerve.
Semimembranosus
The semimembranosus muscle lies deep to the semiten­
dinosus muscle in the posterior compartment of the thigh 
(Fig. 6.63). It is attached above to the superolateral impres­
sion on the ischial tuberosity and below mainly to the 

=== PAGE 608 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
591
groove and adjacent bone on the medial and posterior 
surfaces of the medial tibial condyle. Expansions from the 
tendon also insert into and contribute to the formation of 
ligaments and fascia around the knee joint.
The semimembranosus flexes the leg at the knee joint 
and extends the thigh at the hip joint. Working with the 
semitendinosus muscle, it medially rotates the thigh at the 
hip joint and the leg at the knee joint.
The semimembranosus muscle is innervated by the 
tibial division of the sciatic nerve.
Fig. 6.63  Muscles of the posterior compartment of thigh. Posterior 
view. 
Ischial tuberosity
Quadratus femoris
Adductor magnus
Hamstring part of 
adductor magnus
Long head of biceps femoris
Short head of biceps femoris
Part of semimembranosus that
inserts into capsule 
around knee joint
On anterior aspect of tibia 
attaches to pes anserinus
Semimembranosus
Semitendinosus
In the clinic
Muscle injuries to the lower limb
Muscle injuries may occur as a result of direct trauma or 
as part of an overuse syndrome.
Muscle injuries may occur as a minor muscle tear, 
which may be demonstrated as a focal area of fluid within 
the muscle. With increasingly severe injuries, more 
muscle fibers are torn and this may eventually result in a 
complete muscle tear. The usual muscles in the thigh that 
tear are the hamstring muscles. Tears in the muscles 
below the knee typically occur within the soleus muscle, 
though other muscles may be affected.
Hamstring muscle injury
Injury to the hamstring muscles is a common source of 
pain in athletes, particularly in those competing in sports 
requiring a high degree of power and speed (such as 
sprinting, track and field, football) where the hamstring 
muscles are very susceptible to injury from excessive 
stretching.
The injury can range from a mild muscle strain to a 
complete tear of a muscle or a tendon. It usually occurs 
during sudden accelerations and decelerations or rapid 
change in direction. In adults, the most commonly injured 
is the muscle-tendon junction, which is a wide transition 
zone between the muscle and the tendon. An avulsion of 
the ischial tuberosity with proximal hamstring origin 
attachment is common in the adolescent population, 
particularly during sudden hip flexion because the ischial 
apophysis is the weakest element of the proximal 
hamstring unit in this age group (Fig. 6.64). Both 
ultrasound and MRI can be used to assess the hamstring 
injury with the MRI providing not only the information 
about the extent of the injury but also give some 
indication about the prognosis (future risk of re-tear, loss 
of function, etc).
Fig. 6.64  Coronal MRI of the posterior pelvis and thigh 
showing a hamstring avulsion injury. 
Hamstring avulsion injury

=== PAGE 609 ===
Lower Limb
592
Arteries
Three arteries enter the thigh: the femoral artery, the 
obturator artery, and the inferior gluteal artery. Of these, 
the femoral artery is the largest and supplies most of the 
lower limb. The three arteries contribute to an anastomotic 
network of vessels around the hip joint.
Femoral artery
The femoral artery is the continuation of the external iliac 
artery and begins as the external iliac artery passes under 
the inguinal ligament to enter the femoral triangle on the 
anterior aspect of the upper thigh (Fig. 6.65). The femoral 
artery is palpable in the femoral triangle just inferior to the 
inguinal ligament midway between the anterior superior 
iliac spine and the pubic symphysis.
The femoral artery passes vertically through the femoral 
triangle and then continues down the thigh in the adduc­
tor canal. It leaves the canal by passing through the adduc­
tor hiatus in the adductor magnus muscle and becomes the 
popliteal artery behind the knee.
A cluster of four small branches—superficial epigas­
tric artery, superficial circumflex iliac artery, super­
ficial external pudendal artery, and deep external 
pudendal artery—originate from the femoral artery in 
the femoral triangle and supply cutaneous regions of the 
upper thigh, lower abdomen, and perineum.
Deep artery of  thigh
The largest branch of the femoral artery in the thigh is the 
deep artery of  the thigh (profunda femoris artery), 
which originates from the lateral side of the femoral artery 
in the femoral triangle and is the major source of blood 
supply to the thigh (Fig. 6.65). The deep artery of the thigh 
immediately passes:
■	 posteriorly between the pectineus and adductor longus 
muscles and then between the adductor longus and 
adductor brevis muscles, and
■	 then travels inferiorly between the adductor longus and 
adductor magnus, eventually penetrating through the 
adductor magnus to connect with branches of the 
popliteal artery behind the knee.
The deep artery of the thigh has lateral and medial cir­
cumflex femoral branches and three perforating branches.
Fig. 6.65  Femoral artery. 
Superficial epigastric artery
Sartorius muscle
Deep artery of thigh
Rectus femoris muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Gracilis muscle
Deep external
pudendal artery
Superficial external
pudendal artery
Vastus lateralis muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Sartorius muscle
Artery passes posteriorly
through adductor hiatus and
becomes popliteal artery
Artery in adductor canal
Femoral artery
 • Midway between anterior
    superior iliac spine and
    pubic symphysis inferior
    to inguinal ligament
External iliac artery
Superficial external
iliac artery
Pubic symphysis

=== PAGE 610 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
593
■	 One vessel (descending branch) descends deep to the 
rectus femoris, penetrates the vastus lateralis muscle, 
and connects with a branch of the popliteal artery near 
the knee.
■	 One vessel (transverse branch) passes laterally to 
pierce the vastus lateralis and then circles around 
the proximal shaft of the femur to anastomose with 
branches from the medial femoral circumflex artery, the 
inferior gluteal artery, and the first perforating artery to 
form the cruciate anastomosis around the hip.
Lateral circumflex femoral artery
The lateral circumflex femoral artery normally origi­
nates proximally from the lateral side of the deep artery 
of the thigh, but may arise directly from the femoral artery 
(Fig. 6.66). It passes deep to the sartorius and rectus 
femoris and divides into three terminal branches:
■	 One vessel (ascending branch) ascends laterally deep 
to the tensor fasciae latae muscle and connects with a 
branch of the medial circumflex femoral artery to form 
a channel, which circles the neck of the femur and sup­
plies the neck and head of the femur.
B
Superior gluteal artery
Lateral femoral 
circumflex artery
Cruciate anastomoses
Medial circumflex femoral artery
First perforating artery
Second perforating artery
Third perforating artery
Terminal end of deep
artery of thigh
Popliteal artery
Adductor magnus muscle
Adductor hiatus
Inferior gluteal artery
Piriformis muscle
A
Psoas and iliacus muscles
Sartorius muscle
Rectus femoris muscle
Lateral circumflex femoral artery
Ascending branch
Descending branch
Vastus lateralis muscle
Vastus intermedius muscle
Cut vastus medialis muscle
Quadriceps femoris tendon
Terminal end of deep
artery of thigh
Gracilis muscle
Sartorius muscle
Adductor magnus muscle
First, second, and third
 perforating arteries
Adductor brevis muscle
Adductor longus muscle
Pectineus muscle
Medial circumflex
 femoral artery
Deep artery of thigh
Fig. 6.66  Deep artery of thigh. A. Anterior view. B. Posterior view. 

=== PAGE 611 ===
Lower Limb
594
Fig. 6.67  Obturator artery. 
Ligament of
head of
femur
Obturator
artery
Anterior 
branch
Acetabular branch
Posterior branch
Obturator
externus muscle
Artery of ligament
 of head of femur
Medial circumflex femoral artery
The medial circumflex femoral artery normally origi­
nates proximally from the posteromedial aspect of the deep 
artery of the thigh, but may originate from the femoral 
artery (Fig. 6.66). It passes medially around the shaft of 
the femur, first between the pectineus and iliopsoas and 
then between the obturator externus and adductor brevis 
muscles. Near the margin of the adductor brevis the vessel 
gives off a small branch, which enters the hip joint through 
the acetabular notch and anastomoses with the acetabular 
branch of the obturator artery.
The main trunk of the medial circumflex femoral artery 
passes over the superior margin of the adductor magnus 
and divides into two major branches deep to the quadratus 
femoris muscle:
■	 One branch ascends to the trochanteric fossa and con­
nects with branches of the gluteal and lateral circumflex 
femoral arteries.
■	 The other branch passes laterally to participate with 
branches from the lateral circumflex femoral artery, the 
inferior gluteal artery, and the first perforating artery in 
forming an anastomotic network of vessels around 
the hip.
Perforating arteries
The three perforating arteries branch from the deep 
artery of the thigh (Fig. 6.66) as it descends anterior to the 
adductor brevis muscle—the first originates above the 
muscle, the second originates anterior to the muscle, and 
the third originates below the muscle. All three penetrate 
through the adductor magnus near its attachment to the 
linea aspera to enter and supply the posterior compart­
ment of the thigh. Here, the vessels have ascending and 
descending branches, which interconnect to form a longi­
tudinal channel, which participates above in forming an 
anastomotic network of vessels around the hip and inferi­
orly anastomoses with branches of the popliteal artery 
behind the knee.
Obturator artery
The obturator artery originates as a branch of the inter­
nal iliac artery in the pelvic cavity and enters the medial 
compartment of the thigh through the obturator canal 
(Fig. 6.67). As it passes through the canal, it bifurcates into 
an anterior branch and a posterior branch, which 
together form a channel that circles the margin of the 
obturator membrane and lies within the attachment of the 
obturator externus muscle.
Vessels arising from the anterior and posterior branches 
supply adjacent muscles and anastomose with the inferior 
gluteal and medial circumflex femoral arteries. In addition, 
an acetabular vessel originates from the posterior branch, 
enters the hip joint through the acetabular notch, and 
contributes to the supply of the head of the femur.

=== PAGE 613 ===
Lower Limb
596
Immediately after passing under the inguinal ligament, 
the femoral nerve divides into anterior and posterior 
branches, which supply muscles of the anterior compart­
ment of the thigh and skin on the anterior and medial 
aspects of the thigh and on the medial sides of the leg 
and foot.
Branches of the femoral nerve (Fig. 6.68) include:
■	 anterior cutaneous branches, which penetrate deep 
fascia to supply skin on the front of the thigh and knee;
■	 numerous motor nerves, which supply the quadriceps 
femoris muscles (rectus femoris, vastus lateralis, vastus 
intermedius, and vastus medialis muscles) and the sar­
torius muscle; and
■	 one long cutaneous nerve, the saphenous nerve, which 
supplies skin as far distally as the medial side of the foot.
The saphenous nerve accompanies the femoral artery 
through the adductor canal, but does not pass through the 
adductor hiatus with the femoral artery. Rather, the saphe­
nous nerve penetrates directly through connective tissues 
near the end of the canal to appear between the sartorius 
and gracilis muscles on the medial side of the knee. Here 
the saphenous nerve penetrates deep fascia and continues 
down the medial side of the leg to the foot, and supplies 
skin on the medial side of the knee, leg, and foot.
Obturator nerve
The obturator nerve is a branch of the lumbar plexus 
(spinal cord segments L2–L4) on the posterior abdominal 
wall. It descends in the psoas muscle, and then passes out 
of the medial margin of the psoas muscle to enter the pelvis 
(Fig. 6.69). The obturator nerve continues along the lateral 
pelvic wall and then enters the medial compartment of the 
thigh by passing through the obturator canal. It supplies 
most of the adductor muscles and skin on the medial aspect 
of the thigh. As the obturator nerve enters the thigh, it 
divides into two branches, an anterior branch and a poste­
rior branch, which are separated by the adductor brevis 
muscle:
■	 The posterior branch descends behind the adductor 
brevis muscle and on the anterior surface of the adduc­
tor magnus muscle, and supplies the obturator externus 
and adductor brevis muscles and the part of the adduc­
tor magnus that attaches to the linea aspera.
■	 The anterior branch descends on the anterior surface 
of the adductor brevis muscle and is behind the pectin­
eus and adductor longus muscles—it supplies branches 
to the adductor longus, gracilis, and adductor brevis 
muscles, and often contributes to the supply of the 
pectineus muscle, and cutaneous branches innervate 
the skin on the medial side of the thigh.
Femoral nerve
The femoral nerve originates from the lumbar plexus 
(spinal cord segments L2–L4) on the posterior abdominal 
wall and enters the femoral triangle of the thigh by passing 
under the inguinal ligament (Fig. 6.68). In the femoral 
triangle the femoral nerve lies on the lateral side of the 
femoral artery and is outside the femoral sheath, which 
surrounds the vessels.
Before entering the thigh, the femoral nerve supplies 
branches to the iliacus and pectineus muscles.
Fig. 6.68  Femoral nerve. 
Nerve to pectineus
Anterior branch
Nerves to iliacus
Nerve to sartorius
Rectus femoris muscle
Vastus lateralis muscle
Vastus medialis muscle
Saphenous nerve
Saphenous nerve
Pes anserinus
Sartorius muscle
Gracilis muscle
Anterior cutaneous
 branches
Adductor magnus muscle
Pectineus muscle
Adductor longus muscle
Posterior branch
Femoral nerve

=== PAGE 614 ===
Regional Anatomy  •  Thigh
6
597
Fig. 6.69  Obturator nerve. 
Posterior branch
Obturator externus muscle
Psoas and iliacus muscles
Pectineus muscle
Adductor brevis muscle
Adductor longus muscle
Branch to adductor magnus
 from posterior branch
Adductor magnus muscle
Gracilis muscle
Cutaneous branch
Anterior branch
Obturator nerve
enter the popliteal fossa posterior to the knee. Here, they 
meet the popliteal artery and vein.
Tibial nerve
The tibial part of the sciatic nerve, either before or after its 
separation from the common fibular nerve, supplies 
branches to all muscles in the posterior compartment of 
the thigh (long head of biceps femoris, semimembranosus, 
semitendinosus) except the short head of the biceps 
femoris, which is innervated by the common fibular part 
(Fig. 6.70).
Sciatic nerve
The sciatic nerve is a branch of the lumbosacral plexus 
(spinal cord segments L4–S3) and descends into the 
posterior compartment of the thigh from the gluteal region 
(Fig. 6.70). It innervates all muscles in the posterior com­
partment of the thigh and then its branches continue into 
the leg and foot.
In the posterior compartment of the thigh, the sciatic 
nerve lies on the adductor magnus muscle and is crossed 
by the long head of the biceps femoris muscle.
Proximal to the knee, and sometimes within the 
pelvis, the sciatic nerve divides into its two terminal 
branches: the tibial nerve and the common fibular 
nerve. These nerves travel vertically down the thigh and 
Fig. 6.70  Sciatic nerve. 
Piriformis muscle
Quadratus femoris muscle
Sciatic nerve
Adductor magnus muscle
Long head of biceps 
femoris muscle
Long head of biceps 
femoris muscle
Short head of biceps 
femoris muscle
Common fibular nerve
Tibial nerve
Popliteal artery and vein
Semimembranosus muscle
Semitendinosus muscle
Branch to part of adductor 
magnus originating
from ischial tuberosity
