=== PDF PAGE 1 ===

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
GRAY’S 
ANATOMY 
FOR STUDENTS
Fourth Edition
Richard L. Drake, PhD, FAAA
Director of Anatomy
Professor of Surgery
Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine
Case Western Reserve University
Cleveland, Ohio
A. Wayne Vogl, PhD, FAAA
Professor of Anatomy and Cell Biology
Department of Cellular and Physiological Sciences
Faculty of Medicine
University of British Columbia
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Adam W. M. Mitchell, MB BS, FRCS, FRCR
Consultant Radiologist
Director of Radiology
Fortius Clinic
London, United Kingdom
Illustrations by
Richard Tibbitts and Paul Richardson
Photographs by
Ansell Horn

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
GRAY’S ANATOMY FOR STUDENTS, FOURTH EDITION
	
ISBN:	
978-0-323-39304-1
  IE ISBN: 978-0-323-61104-6
Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, 
further information about the Publisher’s permissions policies, and our arrangements with organizations 
such as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency can be found at our website: 
www.elsevier.com/permissions. This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected 
under copyright by the Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Previous editions copyrighted 2014, 2010, 2005 by Churchill Livingstone, an imprint of Elsevier Inc.
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment 
may become necessary. Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and 
knowledge in evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described 
herein. In using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety 
of others, including parties for whom they have a professional responsibility. With respect to any drug 
or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most current information 
provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to 
verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and 
contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and knowledge 
of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each individual 
patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions. To the fullest extent of the law, neither the 
Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to 
persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or 
operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
The Publisher
Library of Congress Control Number: 2018952008
Senior Content Strategist: Jeremy Bowes
Director, Content Development: Rebecca Gruliow
Publishing Services Manager: Catherine Jackson
Senior Project Manager: John Casey
Senior Book Designer: Amy Buxton
Printed in Canada
9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
1600 John F. Kennedy Blvd.
Ste. 1600
Philadelphia, PA 19103-2899

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
The Body
2
are studied at the same time. For example, if the thorax 
is to be studied, all of its structures are examined. 
This includes the vasculature, the nerves, the bones, 
the muscles, and all other structures and organs 
located in the region of the body defined as the 
thorax. After studying this region, the other regions of 
the body (i.e., the abdomen, pelvis, lower limb, upper 
limb, back, head, and neck) are studied in a similar 
fashion.
■	 In contrast, in a systemic approach, each system of 
the body is studied and followed throughout the entire 
body. For example, a study of the cardiovascular system 
looks at the heart and all of the blood vessels in the body. 
When this is completed, the nervous system (brain, 
spinal cord, and all the nerves) might be examined in 
detail. This approach continues for the whole body until 
every system, including the nervous, skeletal, muscular, 
gastrointestinal, respiratory, lymphatic, and reproduc­
tive systems, has been studied.
Each of these approaches has benefits and deficiencies. 
The regional approach works very well if the anatomy 
course involves cadaver dissection but falls short when 
it comes to understanding the continuity of an entire 
system throughout the body. Similarly, the systemic 
approach fosters an understanding of an entire system 
throughout the body, but it is very difficult to coordinate 
this directly with a cadaver dissection or to acquire suffi­
cient detail.
Important anatomical terms
The anatomical position
The anatomical position is the standard reference position 
of the body used to describe the location of structures (Fig. 
1.1). The body is in the anatomical position when standing 
upright with feet together, hands by the side and face 
looking forward. The mouth is closed and the facial expres­
sion is neutral. The rim of bone under the eyes is in the 
same horizontal plane as the top of the opening to the 
ear, and the eyes are open and focused on something in 
the distance. The palms of the hands face forward with the 
fingers straight and together and with the pad of the thumb 
turned 90° to the pads of the fingers. The toes point 
forward.
Anatomical planes
Three major groups of planes pass through the body in the 
anatomical position (Fig. 1.1).
What is anatomy?
Anatomy includes those structures that can be seen grossly 
(without the aid of magnification) and microscopically 
(with the aid of magnification). Typically, when used by 
itself, the term anatomy tends to mean gross or macroscopic 
anatomy—that is, the study of structures that can be seen 
without using a microscopic. Microscopic anatomy, also 
called histology, is the study of cells and tissues using a 
microscope.
Anatomy forms the basis for the practice of medicine. 
Anatomy leads the physician toward an understanding of 
a patient’s disease, whether he or she is carrying out a 
physical examination or using the most advanced imaging 
techniques. Anatomy is also important for dentists, chiro­
practors, physical therapists, and all others involved in any 
aspect of patient treatment that begins with an analysis of 
clinical signs. The ability to interpret a clinical observation 
correctly is therefore the endpoint of a sound anatomical 
understanding.
Observation and visualization are the primary tech­
niques a student should use to learn anatomy. Anatomy is 
much more than just memorization of lists of names. 
Although the language of anatomy is important, the 
network of information needed to visualize the position of 
physical structures in a patient goes far beyond simple 
memorization. Knowing the names of the various branches 
of the external carotid artery is not the same as being able 
to visualize the course of the lingual artery from its origin 
in the neck to its termination in the tongue. Similarly, 
understanding the organization of the soft palate, how it is 
related to the oral and nasal cavities, and how it moves 
during swallowing is very different from being able to recite 
the names of its individual muscles and nerves. An under­
standing of anatomy requires an understanding of the 
context in which the terminology can be remembered.
How can gross anatomy be studied?
The term anatomy is derived from the Greek word temnein, 
meaning “to cut.” Clearly, therefore, the study of anatomy 
is linked, at its root, to dissection, although dissection of 
cadavers by students is now augmented, or even in some 
cases replaced, by viewing prosected (previously dissected) 
material and plastic models, or using computer teaching 
modules and other learning aids.
Anatomy can be studied following either a regional or a 
systemic approach.
■	 With a regional approach, each region of the body 
is studied separately and all aspects of that region 

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
1
3
What Is Anatomy  •  Important Anatomical Terms
Fig. 1.1  The anatomical position, planes, and terms of location and orientation. 
Feet together
toes forward
Hands by sides
palms forward
Face looking forward
Inferior margin of orbit level with
top of external auditory meatus
Sagittal plane
Coronal plane
Superior
Anterior
Posterior
Medial
Lateral
Inferior
Transverse, horizontal,
or axial plane

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
The Body
4
■	 Proximal and distal are used with reference to being 
closer to or farther from a structure’s origin, particu­
larly in the limbs. For example, the hand is distal to the 
elbow joint. The glenohumeral joint is proximal to 
the elbow joint. These terms are also used to describe 
the relative positions of branches along the course of 
linear structures, such as airways, vessels, and nerves. 
For example, distal branches occur farther away toward 
the ends of the system, whereas proximal branches 
occur closer to and toward the origin of the system.
■	 Cranial (toward the head) and caudal (toward the tail) 
are sometimes used instead of superior and inferior, 
respectively.
■	 Rostral is used, particularly in the head, to describe the 
position of a structure with reference to the nose. For 
example, the forebrain is rostral to the hindbrain.
Superficial and deep
Two other terms used to describe the position of structures 
in the body are superficial and deep. These terms are 
used to describe the relative positions of two structures 
with respect to the surface of the body. For example, the 
sternum is superficial to the heart, and the stomach is deep 
to the abdominal wall.
Superficial and deep can also be used in a more absolute 
fashion to define two major regions of the body. The super­
ficial region of the body is external to the outer layer of 
deep fascia. Deep structures are enclosed by this layer. 
Structures in the superficial region of the body include the 
skin, superficial fascia, and mammary glands. Deep struc­
tures include most skeletal muscles and viscera. Superficial 
wounds are external to the outer layer of deep fascia, 
whereas deep wounds penetrate through it.
■	 Coronal planes are oriented vertically and divide the 
body into anterior and posterior parts.
■	 Sagittal planes also are oriented vertically but are at 
right angles to the coronal planes and divide the body 
into right and left parts. The plane that passes through 
the center of the body dividing it into equal right and 
left halves is termed the median sagittal plane.
■	 Transverse, horizontal, or axial planes divide the 
body into superior and inferior parts.
Terms to describe location
Anterior (ventral) and posterior (dorsal), 
medial and lateral, superior and inferior
Three major pairs of terms are used to describe the location 
of structures relative to the body as a whole or to other 
structures (Fig. 1.1).
■	 Anterior (or ventral) and posterior (or dorsal) 
describe the position of structures relative to the “front” 
and “back” of the body. For example, the nose is an 
anterior (ventral) structure, whereas the vertebral 
column is a posterior (dorsal) structure. Also, the nose 
is anterior to the ears and the vertebral column is pos­
terior to the sternum.
■	 Medial and lateral describe the position of structures 
relative to the median sagittal plane and the sides of 
the body. For example, the thumb is lateral to the little 
finger. The nose is in the median sagittal plane and 
is medial to the eyes, which are in turn medial to the 
external ears.
■	 Superior and inferior describe structures in reference 
to the vertical axis of the body. For example, the head is 
superior to the shoulders and the knee joint is inferior 
to the hip joint.
Proximal and distal, cranial and caudal, 
and rostral
Other terms used to describe positions include proximal 
and distal, cranial and caudal, and rostral.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
1
5
Imaging  •  Diagnostic Imaging Techniques
Fig. 1.2  Cathode ray tube for the production of X-rays. 
Focusing cup
Glass X-ray tube
X-rays
Anode
Tungsten target
Tungsten filament
Cathode
Imaging
Diagnostic imaging techniques
In 1895 Wilhelm Roentgen used the X-rays from a cathode 
ray tube to expose a photographic plate and produce the 
first radiographic exposure of his wife’s hand. Over the past 
35 years there has been a revolution in body imaging, 
which has been paralleled by developments in computer 
technology.
Plain radiography
X-rays are photons (a type of electromagnetic radiation) 
and are generated from a complex X-ray tube, which is a 
type of cathode ray tube (Fig. 1.2). The X-rays are then 
collimated (i.e., directed through lead-lined shutters to stop 
them from fanning out) to the appropriate area of the body. 
As the X-rays pass through the body they are attenuated 
(reduced in energy) by the tissues. Those X-rays that pass 
through the tissues interact with the photographic film.
In the body:
■	 air attenuates X-rays a little;
■	 fat attenuates X-rays more than air but less than 
water; and
■	 bone attenuates X-rays the most.
These differences in attenuation result in differences in 
the level of exposure of the film. When the photographic 
film is developed, bone appears white on the film because 
this region of the film has been exposed to the least amount 
of X-rays. Air appears dark on the film because these 
regions were exposed to the greatest number of X-rays.
Modifications to this X-ray technique allow a continu­
ous stream of X-rays to be produced from the X-ray tube 
and collected on an input screen to allow real-time visual­
ization of moving anatomical structures, barium studies, 
angiography, and fluoroscopy (Fig. 1.3).
Fig. 1.3  Fluoroscopy unit. 

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
The Body
6
Fig. 1.4  Barium sulfate follow-through. 
Fig. 1.5  Digital subtraction angiogram. 
Contrast agents
To demonstrate specific structures, such as bowel loops or 
arteries, it may be necessary to fill these structures with a 
substance that attenuates X-rays more than bowel loops or 
arteries do normally. It is, however, extremely important 
that these substances are nontoxic. Barium sulfate, an 
insoluble salt, is a nontoxic, relatively high-density agent 
that is extremely useful in the examination of the gastro­
intestinal tract. When a barium sulfate suspension is 
ingested it attenuates X-rays and can therefore be used to 
demonstrate the bowel lumen (Fig. 1.4). It is common to 
add air to the barium sulfate suspension, by either ingest­
ing “fizzy” granules or directly instilling air into the body 
cavity, as in a barium enema. This is known as a double-
contrast (air/barium) study.
For some patients it is necessary to inject contrast agents 
directly into arteries or veins. In this case, iodine-based 
molecules are suitable contrast agents. Iodine is chosen 
because it has a relatively high atomic mass and so mark­
edly attenuates X-rays, but also, importantly, it is naturally 
excreted via the urinary system. Intra-arterial and intrave­
nous contrast agents are extremely safe and are well toler­
ated by most patients. Rarely, some patients have an 
anaphylactic reaction to intra-arterial or intravenous 
injections, so the necessary precautions must be taken. 
Intra-arterial and intravenous contrast agents not only 
help in visualizing the arteries and veins but because they 
are excreted by the urinary system, can also be used to 
visualize the kidneys, ureter, and bladder in a process 
known as intravenous urography.
Subtraction angiography
During angiography it is often difficult to appreciate the 
contrast agent in the vessels through the overlying bony 
structures. To circumvent this, the technique of subtrac­
tion angiography has been developed. Simply, one or 
two images are obtained before the injection of contrast 
media. These images are inverted (such that a negative is 
created from the positive image). After injection of the 
contrast media into the vessels, a further series of images 
are obtained, demonstrating the passage of the contrast 
through the arteries into the veins and around the circula­
tion. By adding the “negative precontrast image” to the 
positive postcontrast images, the bones and soft tissues 
are subtracted to produce a solitary image of contrast 
only. Before the advent of digital imaging this was a 
challenge, but now the use of computers has made this 
technique relatively straightforward and instantaneous 
(Fig. 1.5).

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
1
7
Imaging  •  Diagnostic Imaging Techniques
Doppler ultrasound
Doppler ultrasound enables determination of flow, its 
direction, and its velocity within a vessel using simple 
ultrasound techniques. Sound waves bounce off moving 
structures and are returned. The degree of frequency shift 
determines whether the object is moving away from or 
toward the probe and the speed at which it is traveling. 
Precise measurements of blood flow and blood velocity can 
therefore be obtained, which in turn can indicate sites of 
blockage in blood vessels.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) was invented in the 1970s by 
Sir Godfrey Hounsfield, who was awarded the Nobel Prize 
in Medicine in 1979. Since this inspired invention there 
have been many generations of CT scanners.
A CT scanner obtains a series of images of the body 
(slices) in the axial plane. The patient lies on a bed, an 
X-ray tube passes around the body (Fig. 1.7), and a series 
of images are obtained. A computer carries out a complex 
mathematical transformation on the multitude of images 
to produce the final image (Fig. 1.8).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Nuclear magnetic resonance imaging was first described in 
1946 and used to determine the structure of complex 
Ultrasound
Ultrasonography of the body is widely used for all aspects 
of medicine.
Ultrasound is a very high frequency sound wave 
(not electromagnetic radiation) generated by piezoelectric 
materials, such that a series of sound waves is produced. 
Importantly, the piezoelectric material can also receive the 
sound waves that bounce back from the internal organs. 
The sound waves are then interpreted by a powerful 
computer, and a real-time image is produced on the 
display panel.
Developments in ultrasound technology, including the 
size of the probes and the frequency range, mean that a 
broad range of areas can now be scanned.
Traditionally ultrasound is used for assessing the 
abdomen (Fig. 1.6) and the fetus in pregnant women. 
Ultrasound is also widely used to assess the eyes, neck, soft 
tissues, and peripheral musculoskeletal system. Probes 
have been placed on endoscopes, and endoluminal ultra­
sound of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum is now 
routine. Endocavity ultrasound is carried out most com­
monly to assess the genital tract in women using a 
transvaginal or transrectal route. In men, transrectal 
ultrasound is the imaging method of choice to assess the 
prostate in those with suspected prostate hypertrophy or 
malignancy.
Fig. 1.6  Ultrasound examination of the abdomen. 
Fig. 1.7  Computed tomography scanner. 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
The Body
8
The important difference between gamma rays and 
X-rays is that gamma rays are produced from within the 
nucleus of an atom when an unstable nucleus decays, 
whereas X-rays are produced by bombarding an atom with 
electrons.
For an area to be visualized, the patient must receive a 
gamma ray emitter, which must have a number of proper­
ties to be useful, including:
■	 a reasonable half-life (e.g., 6 to 24 hours),
■	 an easily measurable gamma ray, and
molecules. The process of magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) is dependent on the free protons in the hydrogen 
nuclei in molecules of water (H2O). Because water is 
present in almost all biological tissues, the hydrogen proton 
is ideal. The protons within a patient’s hydrogen nuclei can 
be regarded as small bar magnets, which are randomly 
oriented in space. The patient is placed in a strong magnetic 
field, which aligns the bar magnets. When a pulse of radio 
waves is passed through the patient the magnets are 
deflected, and as they return to their aligned position they 
emit small radio pulses. The strength and frequency of the 
emitted pulses and the time it takes for the protons to 
return to their pre-excited state produce a signal. These 
signals are analyzed by a powerful computer, and an image 
is created (Fig. 1.9).
By altering the sequence of pulses to which the protons 
are subjected, different properties of the protons can be 
assessed. These properties are referred to as the “weight­
ing” of the scan. By altering the pulse sequence and the 
scanning parameters, T1-weighted images (Fig. 1.10A) 
and T2-weighted images (Fig. 1.10B) can be obtained. 
These two types of imaging sequences provide differences 
in image contrast, which accentuate and optimize different 
tissue characteristics.
From the clinical point of view:
■	 Most T1-weighted images show dark fluid and bright 
fat—for example, within the brain the cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) is dark.
■	 T2-weighted images demonstrate a bright signal from 
fluid and an intermediate signal from fat—for example, 
in the brain the CSF appears white.
MRI can also be used to assess flow within vessels and 
to produce complex angiograms of the peripheral and 
cerebral circulation.
Diffusion-weighted imaging
Diffusion-weighted imaging provides information on the 
degree of Brownian motion of water molecules in various 
tissues. There is relatively free diffusion in extracellular 
spaces and more restricted diffusion in intracellular 
spaces. In tumors and infarcted tissue, there is an increase 
in intracellular fluid water molecules compared with 
the extracellular fluid environment resulting in overall 
increased restricted diffusion, and therefore identification 
of abnormal from normal tissue.
Nuclear medicine imaging
Nuclear medicine involves imaging using gamma rays, 
which are another type of electromagnetic radiation. 
Fig. 1.8  Computed tomography scan of the abdomen at vertebral 
level L2. 
Fig. 1.9  A T2-weighted MR image in the sagittal plane of the 
pelvic viscera in a woman. 

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
1
9
Imaging  •  Nuclear Medicine Imaging
■	 energy deposition in as low a dose as possible in the 
patient’s tissues.
The most commonly used radionuclide (radioisotope) is 
technetium-99m. This may be injected as a technetium 
salt or combined with other complex molecules. For 
example, by combining technetium-99m with methylene 
diphosphonate (MDP), a radiopharmaceutical is produced. 
When injected into the body this radiopharmaceutical 
specifically binds to bone, allowing assessment of the 
skeleton. Similarly, combining technetium-99m with other 
compounds permits assessment of other parts of the body, 
for example the urinary tract and cerebral blood flow.
Depending on how the radiopharmaceutical is 
absorbed, distributed, metabolized, and excreted by the 
body after injection, images are obtained using a gamma 
camera (Fig. 1.11).
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) is an imaging 
modality for detecting positron-emitting radionuclides. A 
positron is an anti-electron, which is a positively charged 
particle of antimatter. Positrons are emitted from the 
decay of proton-rich radionuclides. Most of these radionu­
clides are made in a cyclotron and have extremely short 
half-lives.
The most commonly used PET radionuclide is fluorode­
oxyglucose (FDG) labeled with fluorine-18 (a positron 
Fig. 1.10  T1-weighted (A) and T2-weighted (B) MR images of the 
brain in the coronal plane. 
A
B
Fig. 1.11  A gamma camera. 

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
The Body
10
radiograph; that is, with the patient’s back closest to the 
X-ray tube.).
Occasionally, when patients are too unwell to stand 
erect, films are obtained on the bed in an anteroposterior 
(AP) position. These films are less standardized than PA 
films, and caution should always be taken when interpret­
ing AP radiographs.
The plain chest radiograph should always be 
checked for quality. Film markers should be placed on the 
appropriate side. (Occasionally patients have dextrocardia, 
which may be misinterpreted if the film marker is placed 
inappropriately.) A good-quality chest radiograph will 
demonstrate the lungs, cardiomediastinal contour, dia­
phragm, ribs, and peripheral soft tissues.
Abdominal radiograph
Plain abdominal radiographs are obtained in the AP 
supine position. From time to time an erect plain abdominal 
radiograph is obtained when small bowel obstruction is 
suspected.
Gastrointestinal contrast examinations
High-density contrast medium is ingested to opacify the 
esophagus, stomach, small bowel, and large bowel. As 
described previously (p. 6), the bowel is insufflated with air 
(or carbon dioxide) to provide a double-contrast study. In 
many countries, endoscopy has superseded upper gastro­
intestinal imaging, but the mainstay of imaging the large 
bowel is the double-contrast barium enema. Typically the 
patient needs to undergo bowel preparation, in which 
powerful cathartics are used to empty the bowel. At the 
time of the examination a small tube is placed into the 
rectum and a barium suspension is run into the large 
bowel. The patient undergoes a series of twists and turns 
so that the contrast passes through the entire large bowel. 
The contrast is emptied and air is passed through the same 
tube to insufflate the large bowel. A thin layer of barium 
coats the normal mucosa, allowing mucosal detail to be 
visualized (see Fig. 1.4).
Urological contrast studies
Intravenous urography is the standard investigation for 
assessing the urinary tract. Intravenous contrast medium 
is injected, and images are obtained as the medium is 
excreted through the kidneys. A series of films are obtained 
during this period from immediately after the injection up 
to approximately 20 minutes later, when the bladder is full 
of contrast medium.
This series of radiographs demonstrates the kidneys, 
ureters, and bladder and enables assessment of the retro­
peritoneum and other structures that may press on the 
urinary tract.
emitter). Tissues that are actively metabolizing glucose 
take up this compound, and the resulting localized high 
concentration of this molecule compared to background 
emission is detected as a “hot spot.”
PET has become an important imaging modality in the 
detection of cancer and the assessment of its treatment 
and recurrence.
Single photon emission computed tomography
Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) 
is an imaging modality for detecting gamma rays 
emitted from the decay of injected radionuclides such as 
technetium-99m, iodine-123, or iodine-131. The rays are 
detected by a 360-degree rotating camera, which allows the 
construction of 3D images. SPECT can be used to diagnose 
a wide range of disease conditions such as coronary artery 
disease and bone fractures.
IMAGE INTERPRETATION
Imaging is necessary in most clinical specialties to diagnose 
pathological changes to tissues. It is paramount to appreci­
ate what is normal and what is abnormal. An appreciation 
of how the image is obtained, what the normal variations 
are, and what technical considerations are necessary to 
obtain a radiological diagnosis. Without understanding the 
anatomy of the region imaged, it is impossible to comment 
on the abnormal.
Plain radiography
Plain radiographs are undoubtedly the most common form 
of image obtained in a hospital or local practice. Before 
interpretation, it is important to know about the imaging 
technique and the views obtained as standard.
In most instances (apart from chest radiography) the 
X-ray tube is 1 m away from the X-ray film. The object in 
question, for example a hand or a foot, is placed upon the 
film. When describing subject placement for radiography, 
the part closest to the X-ray tube is referred to first and that 
closest to the film is referred to second. For example, when 
positioning a patient for an anteroposterior (AP) radio­
graph, the more anterior part of the body is closest to the 
tube and the posterior part is closest to the film.
When X-rays are viewed on a viewing box, the right side 
of the patient is placed to the observer’s left; therefore, the 
observer views the radiograph as though looking at a 
patient in the anatomical position.
Chest radiograph
The chest radiograph is one of the most commonly 
requested plain radiographs. An image is taken with the 
patient erect and placed posteroanteriorly (PA chest 

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
1
11
Imaging  •  Safety in Imaging
and a series of representative films are obtained for 
clinical use.
SAFETY IN IMAGING
Whenever a patient undergoes an X-ray or nuclear medi­
cine investigation, a dose of radiation is given (Table 1.1). 
As a general principle it is expected that the dose given is 
as low as reasonably possible for a diagnostic image to be 
obtained. Numerous laws govern the amount of radiation 
exposure that a patient can undergo for a variety of proce­
dures, and these are monitored to prevent any excess or 
additional dosage. Whenever a radiograph is booked, the 
clinician ordering the procedure must appreciate its neces­
sity and understand the dose given to the patient to ensure 
that the benefits significantly outweigh the risks.
Imaging modalities such as ultrasound and MRI are 
ideal because they do not impart significant risk to the 
patient. Moreover, ultrasound imaging is the modality of 
choice for assessing the fetus.
Any imaging device is expensive, and consequently 
the more complex the imaging technique (e.g., MRI) the 
more expensive the investigation. Investigations must be 
carried out judiciously, based on a sound clinical history 
and examination, for which an understanding of anatomy 
is vital.
Computed tomography
Computed tomography is the preferred terminology rather 
than computerized tomography, though both terms are 
used interchangeably by physicians.
It is important for the student to understand the presen­
tation of images. Most images are acquired in the axial 
plane and viewed such that the observer looks from below 
and upward toward the head (from the foot of the bed). By 
implication:
■the right side of the patient is on the left side of the
image, and
■the uppermost border of the image is anterior.
Many patients are given oral and intravenous contrast 
media to differentiate bowel loops from other abdominal 
organs and to assess the vascularity of normal anatomical 
structures. When intravenous contrast is given, the earlier 
the images are obtained, the greater the likelihood of arte­
rial enhancement. As the time is delayed between injection 
and image acquisition, a venous phase and an equilibrium 
phase are also obtained.
The great advantage of CT scanning is the ability to 
extend and compress the gray scale to visualize the bones, 
soft tissues, and visceral organs. Altering the window set­
tings and window centering provides the physician with 
specific information about these structures.
Magnetic resonance imaging
There is no doubt that MRI has revolutionized the under­
standing and interpretation of the brain and its coverings. 
Furthermore, it has significantly altered the practice of 
musculoskeletal medicine and surgery. Images can be 
obtained in any plane and in most sequences. Typically the 
images are viewed using the same principles as CT. Intrave­
nous contrast agents are also used to further enhance tissue 
contrast. Typically, MRI contrast agents contain paramag­
netic substances (e.g., gadolinium and manganese).
Nuclear medicine imaging
Most nuclear medicine images are functional studies. 
Images are usually interpreted directly from a computer, 
Table 1.1  The approximate dosage of radiation exposure 
as an order of magnitude
Examination
Typical 
effective 
dose (mSv)
Equivalent duration 
of background 
exposure
Chest radiograph
0.02
3 days
Abdomen
1.00
6 months
Intravenous urography
2.50
14 months
CT scan of head
2.30
1 year
CT scan of abdomen 
and pelvis
10.00
4.5 years

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
The Body
12
Fig. 1.12  The axial skeleton and the appendicular skeleton. 
Axial skeleton
Appendicular
skeleton
Body systems
SKELETAL SYSTEM
The skeleton can be divided into two subgroups, the axial 
skeleton and the appendicular skeleton. The axial skeleton 
consists of the bones of the skull (cranium), vertebral 
column, ribs, and sternum, whereas the appendicular 
skeleton consists of the bones of the upper and lower limbs 
(Fig. 1.12).
The skeletal system consists of cartilage and bone.
Cartilage
Cartilage is an avascular form of connective tissue consist­
ing of extracellular fibers embedded in a matrix that con­
tains cells localized in small cavities. The amount and kind 
of extracellular fibers in the matrix varies depending on the 
type of cartilage. In heavy weightbearing areas or areas 
prone to pulling forces, the amount of collagen is greatly 
increased and the cartilage is almost inextensible. In con­
trast, in areas where weightbearing demands and stress are 
less, cartilage containing elastic fibers and fewer collagen 
fibers is common. The functions of cartilage are to:
■	 support soft tissues,
■	 provide a smooth, gliding surface for bone articulations 
at joints, and
■	 enable the development and growth of long bones.
There are three types of cartilage:
■	 hyaline—most common; matrix contains a moderate 
amount of collagen fibers (e.g., articular surfaces of 
bones);
■	 elastic—matrix contains collagen fibers along with a 
large number of elastic fibers (e.g., external ear);
■	 fibrocartilage—matrix contains a limited number of 
cells and ground substance amidst a substantial amount 
of collagen fibers (e.g., intervertebral discs).
Cartilage is nourished by diffusion and has no blood 
vessels, lymphatics, or nerves.

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
Body Systems  •  Skeletal System
1
13
Bone
Bone is a calcified, living, connective tissue that forms the 
majority of the skeleton. It consists of an intercellular 
calcified matrix, which also contains collagen fibers, and 
several types of cells within the matrix. Bones function as:
■	 supportive structures for the body,
■	 protectors of vital organs,
■	 reservoirs of calcium and phosphorus,
■	 levers on which muscles act to produce movement, and
■	 containers for blood-producing cells.
There are two types of bone, compact and spongy (tra­
becular or cancellous). Compact bone is dense bone that 
forms the outer shell of all bones and surrounds spongy 
bone. Spongy bone consists of spicules of bone enclosing 
cavities containing blood-forming cells (marrow). Classifi­
cation of bones is by shape.
■	 Long bones are tubular (e.g., humerus in upper limb; 
femur in lower limb).
■	 Short bones are cuboidal (e.g., bones of the wrist and 
ankle).
■	 Flat bones consist of two compact bone plates separated 
by spongy bone (e.g., skull).
■	 Irregular bones are bones with various shapes (e.g., 
bones of the face).
■	 Sesamoid bones are round or oval bones that develop in 
tendons.
In the clinic
Accessory and sesamoid bones
These are extra bones that are not usually found as part of 
the normal skeleton, but can exist as a normal variant in 
many people. They are typically found in multiple 
locations in the wrist and hands, ankles and feet (Fig. 1.13). 
These should not be mistaken for fractures on imaging.
Sesamoid bones are embedded within tendons, the 
largest of which is the patella. There are many other 
sesamoids in the body particularly in tendons of the 
hands and feet, and most frequently in flexor tendons of 
the thumb and big toe.
Degenerative and inflammatory changes of, as well as 
mechanical stresses on, the accessory bones and 
sesamoids can cause pain, which can be treated with 
physiotherapy and targeted steroid injections, but in some 
severe cases it may be necessary to surgically remove the 
bone.
Fig. 1.13  Accessory and sesamoid bones. A. Radiograph of 
the ankle region showing an accessory bone (os trigonum). 
B. Radiograph of the feet showing numerous sesamoid bones 
and an accessory bone (os naviculare). 
Os naviculare
A
B
Os trigonum
Sesamoid bones

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
The Body
14
Bones are vascular and are innervated. Generally, an 
adjacent artery gives off a nutrient artery, usually one per 
bone, that directly enters the internal cavity of the bone 
and supplies the marrow, spongy bone, and inner layers of 
compact bone. In addition, all bones are covered externally, 
except in the area of a joint where articular cartilage is 
present, by a fibrous connective tissue membrane called the 
periosteum, which has the unique capability of forming new 
bone. This membrane receives blood vessels whose branches 
supply the outer layers of compact bone. A bone stripped 
of its periosteum will not survive. Nerves accompany the 
vessels that supply the bone and the periosteum. Most of 
the nerves passing into the internal cavity with the nutrient 
artery are vasomotor fibers that regulate blood flow. Bone 
itself has few sensory nerve fibers. On the other hand, the 
periosteum is supplied with numerous sensory nerve fibers 
and is very sensitive to any type of injury.
Developmentally, all bones come from mesenchyme by 
either intramembranous ossification, in which mesenchy­
mal models of bones undergo ossification, or endochondral 
ossification, in which cartilaginous models of bones form 
from mesenchyme and undergo ossification.
In the clinic
Determination of skeletal age
Throughout life the bones develop in a predictable way to 
form the skeletally mature adult at the end of puberty. In 
western countries skeletal maturity tends to occur between 
the ages of 20 and 25 years. However, this may well vary 
according to geography and socioeconomic conditions. 
Skeletal maturity will also be determined by genetic factors 
and disease states.
Up until the age of skeletal maturity, bony growth and 
development follows a typically predictable ordered state, 
which can be measured through either ultrasound, plain 
radiographs, or MRI scanning. Typically, the nondominant 
(left) hand is radiographed, and the radiograph is compared 
to a series of standard radiographs. From these images the 
bone age can be determined (Fig. 1.14).
In certain disease states, such as malnutrition and 
hypothyroidism, bony maturity may be slow. If the skeletal 
bone age is significantly reduced from the patient’s true age, 
treatment may be required.
In the healthy individual the bone age accurately 
represents the true age of the patient. This is important in 
determining the true age of the subject. This may also have 
medicolegal importance.
A
B
D
Carpal
bones
C
Fig. 1.14  A developmental series of radiographs showing the 
progressive ossification of carpal (wrist) bones from 3 (A) to 10 
(D) years of age. 

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
Body Systems  •  Skeletal System
1
15
In the clinic
Bone marrow transplants
The bone marrow serves an important function. There are 
two types of bone marrow, red marrow (otherwise known 
as myeloid tissue) and yellow marrow. Red blood cells, 
platelets, and most white blood cells arise from within the 
red marrow. In the yellow marrow a few white cells are 
made; however, this marrow is dominated by large fat 
globules (producing its yellow appearance) (Fig. 1.15).
From birth most of the body’s marrow is red; however, 
as the subject ages, more red marrow is converted into 
yellow marrow within the medulla of the long and 
flat bones.
Bone marrow contains two types of stem cells. 
Hemopoietic stem cells give rise to the white blood cells, 
red blood cells, and platelets. Mesenchymal stem cells 
differentiate into structures that form bone, cartilage, 
and muscle.
There are a number of diseases that may involve the 
bone marrow, including infection and malignancy. In patients 
who develop a bone marrow malignancy (e.g., leukemia) it 
may be possible to harvest nonmalignant cells from the 
patient’s bone marrow or cells from another person’s bone 
marrow. The patient’s own marrow can be destroyed with 
chemotherapy or radiation and the new cells infused. This 
treatment is bone marrow transplantation.
Fig. 1.15  T1-weighted image in the coronal plane, 
demonstrating the relatively high signal intensity returned from 
the femoral heads and proximal femoral necks, consistent with 
yellow marrow. In this young patient, the vertebral bodies return 
an intermediate darker signal that represents red marrow. There 
is relatively little fat in these vertebrae; hence the lower signal 
return. 
Yellow marrow in femoral head
Red marrow in body
of lumbar vertebra

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
The Body
16
In the clinic
Bone fractures
Fractures occur in normal bone because of abnormal load or 
stress, in which the bone gives way (Fig. 1.16A). Fractures 
may also occur in bone that is of poor quality (osteoporosis); 
in such cases a normal stress is placed upon a bone that is 
not of sufficient quality to withstand this force and 
subsequently fractures.
In children whose bones are still developing, fractures 
may occur across the growth plate or across the shaft. These 
shaft fractures typically involve partial cortical disruption, 
similar to breaking a branch of a young tree; hence they are 
termed “greenstick” fractures.
After a fracture has occurred, the natural response is to 
heal the fracture. Between the fracture margins a blood clot 
is formed into which new vessels grow. A jelly-like matrix is 
formed, and further migration of collagen-producing cells 
occurs. On this soft tissue framework, calcium 
hydroxyapatite is produced by osteoblasts and forms 
insoluble crystals, and then bone matrix is laid down. As 
more bone is produced, a callus can be demonstrated 
forming across the fracture site.
Treatment of fractures requires a fracture line reduction. If 
this cannot be maintained in a plaster of Paris cast, it may 
require internal or external fixation with screws and metal 
rods (Fig. 1.16B).
Fig. 1.16  Radiograph, lateral view, showing fracture of the ulna 
at the elbow joint (A) and repair of this fracture (B) using 
internal fixation with a plate and multiple screws. 
A
B
In the clinic
Avascular necrosis
Avascular necrosis is cellular death of bone resulting from a 
temporary or permanent loss of blood supply to that bone. 
Avascular necrosis may occur in a variety of medical 
conditions, some of which have an etiology that is less than 
clear. A typical site for avascular necrosis is a fracture across 
the femoral neck in an elderly patient. In these patients there 
is loss of continuity of the cortical medullary blood flow with 
loss of blood flow deep to the retinacular fibers. This 
essentially renders the femoral head bloodless; it 
subsequently undergoes necrosis and collapses (Fig. 1.17). In 
these patients it is necessary to replace the femoral head 
with a prosthesis.
Fig. 1.17  Image of the hip joints demonstrating loss of height of 
the right femoral head with juxta-articular bony sclerosis and 
subchondral cyst formation secondary to avascular necrosis. 
There is also significant wasting of the muscles supporting the 
hip, which is secondary to disuse and pain. 
Normal left hip
Bladder
Avascular necrosis
Wasting of gluteal muscle

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
Body Systems  •  Skeletal System
1
17
In the clinic
Epiphyseal fractures
As the skeleton develops, there are stages of intense 
growth typically around the ages of 7 to 10 years and later 
in puberty. These growth spurts are associated with 
increased cellular activity around the growth plate 
between the head and shaft of a bone. This increase in 
activity renders the growth plates more vulnerable to 
injuries, which may occur from dislocation across a 
growth plate or fracture through a growth plate. 
Occasionally an injury may result in growth plate 
compression, destroying that region of the growth plate, 
which may result in asymmetrical growth across that joint 
region. All fractures across the growth plate must be 
treated with care and expediency, requiring fracture 
reduction.
Fig. 1.18  Joints. A. Synovial joint. B. Solid joint. 
A
B
Synovial joint
Solid joint
Bone
Articular cavity
Bone
Bone
Connective tissue
Bone
Joints
The sites where two skeletal elements come together 
are termed joints. The two general categories of joints 
(Fig. 1.18) are those in which:
■	 the skeletal elements are separated by a cavity (i.e., 
synovial joints), and
■	 there is no cavity and the components are held together 
by connective tissue (i.e., solid joints).
Blood vessels that cross over a joint and nerves that 
innervate muscles acting on a joint usually contribute 
articular branches to that joint.
Synovial joints
Synovial joints are connections between skeletal compo­
nents where the elements involved are separated by a 
narrow articular cavity (Fig. 1.19). In addition to contain­
ing an articular cavity, these joints have a number of 
characteristic features.
First, a layer of cartilage, usually hyaline cartilage, 
covers the articulating surfaces of the skeletal elements. In 
other words, bony surfaces do not normally contact one 
another directly. As a consequence, when these joints are 
viewed in normal radiographs, a wide gap seems to sepa­
rate the adjacent bones because the cartilage that covers 
the articulating surfaces is more transparent to X-rays 
than bone.
A second characteristic feature of synovial joints is the 
presence of a joint capsule consisting of an inner syno­
vial membrane and an outer fibrous membrane.
■	 The synovial membrane attaches to the margins of the 
joint surfaces at the interface between the cartilage and 
bone and encloses the articular cavity. The synovial 
membrane is highly vascular and produces synovial 
fluid, which percolates into the articular cavity and 
lubricates the articulating surfaces. Closed sacs of 
synovial membrane also occur outside joints, where 
they form synovial bursae or tendon sheaths. Bursae 
often intervene between structures, such as tendons 
and bone, tendons and joints, or skin and bone, and 
reduce the friction of one structure moving over the 
other. Tendon sheaths surround tendons and also 
reduce friction.
■	 The fibrous membrane is formed by dense connective 
tissue and surrounds and stabilizes the joint. Parts of 
the fibrous membrane may thicken to form ligaments, 
which further stabilize the joint. Ligaments outside the 
capsule usually provide additional reinforcement.
Another common but not universal feature of synovial 
joints is the presence of additional structures within the 
area enclosed by the capsule or synovial membrane, such 
as articular discs (usually composed of fibrocartilage), 
fat pads, and tendons. Articular discs absorb compres­
sion forces, adjust to changes in the contours of joint sur­
faces during movements, and increase the range of 
movements that can occur at joints. Fat pads usually occur 
between the synovial membrane and the capsule and move 

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
The Body
18
Fig. 1.19  Synovial joints. A. Major features of a synovial joint. B. Accessory structures associated with synovial joints. 
Bone
Bone
Bone
Bone
Fibrous
membrane
A 
B
Fibrous
membrane
Synovial
membrane
Joint
capsule
Synovial
membrane
Hyaline
cartilage
Hyaline cartilage
Articular cavity
Articular cavity
Sheath
Bursa
Tendon
Articular
disc
Fat pad
Skin
into and out of regions as joint contours change during 
movement. Redundant regions of the synovial membrane 
and fibrous membrane allow for large movements at joints.
Descriptions of  synovial joints based on shape 
and movement
Synovial joints are described based on shape and 
movement:
■	 based on the shape of their articular surfaces, synovial 
joints are described as plane (flat), hinge, pivot, 
bicondylar (two sets of contact points), condylar (ellip­
soid), saddle, and ball and socket;
■	 based on movement, synovial joints are described as 
uniaxial (movement in one plane), biaxial (movement 
in two planes), and multiaxial (movement in three 
planes).
Hinge joints are uniaxial, whereas ball and socket joints 
are multiaxial.

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
Body Systems  •  Skeletal System
1
19
adduction, circumduction, and rotation (e.g., hip 
joint)
Solid joints
Solid joints are connections between skeletal elements 
where the adjacent surfaces are linked together either 
by fibrous connective tissue or by cartilage, usually fibro­
cartilage (Fig. 1.21). Movements at these joints are more 
restricted than at synovial joints.
Fibrous joints include sutures, gomphoses, and 
syndesmoses.
■	 Sutures occur only in the skull where adjacent bones 
are linked by a thin layer of connective tissue termed a 
sutural ligament.
■	 Gomphoses occur only between the teeth and adjacent 
bone. In these joints, short collagen tissue fibers in the 
periodontal ligament run between the root of the tooth 
and the bony socket.
■	 Syndesmoses are joints in which two adjacent bones 
are linked by a ligament. Examples are the ligamentum 
flavum, which connects adjacent vertebral laminae, 
and an interosseous membrane, which links, for 
example, the radius and ulna in the forearm.
Cartilaginous joints include synchondroses and 
symphyses.
Specific types of  synovial joints 
(Fig. 1.20)
■	 Plane joints—allow sliding or gliding movements when 
one bone moves across the surface of another (e.g., 
acromioclavicular joint)
■	 Hinge joints—allow movement around one axis that 
passes transversely through the joint; permit flexion and 
extension (e.g., elbow [humero-ulnar] joint)
■	 Pivot joints—allow movement around one axis that 
passes longitudinally along the shaft of the bone; permit 
rotation (e.g., atlanto-axial joint)
■	 Bicondylar joints—allow movement mostly in one axis 
with limited rotation around a second axis; formed by 
two convex condyles that articulate with concave or flat 
surfaces (e.g., knee joint)
■	 Condylar (ellipsoid) joints—allow movement around 
two axes that are at right angles to each other; permit 
flexion, extension, abduction, adduction, and circum­
duction (limited) (e.g., wrist joint)
■	 Saddle joints—allow movement around two axes that 
are at right angles to each other; the articular surfaces 
are saddle shaped; permit flexion, extension, abduction, 
adduction, and circumduction (e.g., carpometacarpal 
joint of the thumb)
■	 Ball and socket joints—allow movement around 
multiple axes; permit flexion, extension, abduction, 
Fig. 1.20  Various types of synovial joints. A. Condylar (wrist). B. Gliding (radio-ulnar). C. Hinge (elbow). D. Ball and socket (hip). E. Saddle 
(carpometacarpal of thumb). F. Pivot (atlanto-axial). 
B
F
A
C
D
E
Radius
Wrist joint
Humerus
Synovial membrane
Radius
Cartilage
Synovial membrane
Femur
Trapezium
Metacarpal I
Synovial cavity
Ulna
Articular disc
Synovial
membrane
Atlas
Odontoid process
of axis
Olecranon
Ulna

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
The Body
20
Fig. 1.21  Solid joints. 
Fibrous
Cartilaginous
SOLID JOINTS
Sutures
Gomphosis
Syndesmosis
Synchondrosis
Symphysis
Sutural ligament
Head
Long bone
Shaft
Tooth
Bone
Ulna
Interosseous
membrane
Radius
Periodontal
ligament
Skull
Cartilage of
growth plate
Intervertebral
discs
Pubic
symphysis
■	 Synchondroses occur where two ossification centers 
in a developing bone remain separated by a layer of 
cartilage, for example, the growth plate that occurs 
between the head and shaft of developing long bones. 
These joints allow bone growth and eventually become 
completely ossified.
■	 Symphyses occur where two separate bones are inter­
connected by cartilage. Most of these types of joints 
occur in the midline and include the pubic symphysis 
between the two pelvic bones, and intervertebral discs 
between adjacent vertebrae.

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
Body Systems  •  Skeletal System
1
21
In the clinic
Degenerative joint disease
Degenerative joint disease is commonly known as 
osteoarthritis or osteoarthrosis. The disorder is related to 
aging but not caused by aging. Typically there are decreases 
in water and proteoglycan content within the cartilage. The 
cartilage becomes more fragile and more susceptible to 
mechanical disruption (Fig. 1.22). As the cartilage wears, the 
underlying bone becomes fissured and also thickens. 
Synovial fluid may be forced into small cracks that appear in 
the bone’s surface, which produces large cysts. Furthermore, 
reactive juxta-articular bony nodules are formed 
(osteophytes) (Fig. 1.23). As these processes occur, there is 
slight deformation, which alters the biomechanical forces 
through the joint. This in turn creates abnormal stresses, 
which further disrupt the joint.
In the United States, osteoarthritis accounts for up to 
one-quarter of primary health care visits and is regarded as a 
significant problem.
The etiology of osteoarthritis is not clear; however, 
osteoarthritis can occur secondary to other joint diseases, 
such as rheumatoid arthritis and infection. Overuse of joints 
and abnormal strains, such as those experienced by people 
who play sports, often cause one to be more susceptible to 
chronic joint osteoarthritis.
Various treatments are available, including weight 
reduction, proper exercise, anti-inflammatory drug treatment, 
and joint replacement (Fig. 1.24).
Fig. 1.22  This operative photograph demonstrates the focal 
areas of cartilage loss in the patella and femoral condyles 
throughout the knee joint. 
Patella
Cartilage loss
Femoral condyles
Cartilage loss
Fig. 1.23  This radiograph demonstrates the loss of joint space in 
the medial compartment and presence of small spiky 
osteophytic regions at the medial lateral aspect of the joint. 
Osteophytes
Loss of joint space

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
The Body
22
Arthroscopy
Arthroscopy is a technique of visualizing the inside of a joint 
using a small telescope placed through a tiny incision in the 
skin. Arthroscopy can be performed in most joints. However, 
it is most commonly performed in the knee, shoulder, ankle, 
and hip joints.
Arthroscopy allows the surgeon to view the inside of the 
joint and its contents. Notably, in the knee, the menisci and 
the ligaments are easily seen, and it is possible using 
separate puncture sites and specific instruments to remove 
the menisci and replace the cruciate ligaments. The 
advantages of arthroscopy are that it is performed through 
small incisions, it enables patients to quickly recover and 
return to normal activity, and it only requires either a light 
anesthetic or regional anesthesia during the procedure.
In the clinic—cont’d
Fig. 1.24  After knee replacement. This radiograph shows the 
position of the prosthesis. 
In the clinic
Joint replacement
Joint replacement is undertaken for a variety of reasons. 
These predominantly include degenerative joint disease and 
joint destruction. Joints that have severely degenerated or 
lack their normal function are painful. In some patients, the 
pain may be so severe that it prevents them from leaving 
the house and undertaking even the smallest of activities 
without discomfort.
Large joints are commonly affected, including the hip, 
knee, and shoulder. However, with ongoing developments 
in joint replacement materials and surgical techniques, even 
small joints of the fingers can be replaced.
Typically, both sides of the joint are replaced; in the hip 
joint the acetabulum will be reamed, and a plastic or metal 
cup will be introduced. The femoral component will be fitted 
precisely to the femur and cemented in place (Fig. 1.25).
Most patients derive significant benefit from joint 
replacement and continue to lead an active life afterward. In 
a minority of patients who have been fitted with a metal 
acetabular cup and metal femoral component, an aseptic 
lymphocyte-dominated vasculitis-associated lesion (ALVAL) 
may develop, possibly caused by a hypersensitivity response 
to the release of metal ions in adjacent tissues. These 
patients often have chronic pain and might need additional 
surgery to replace these joint replacements with safer 
models.
Fig. 1.25  This is a radiograph, anteroposterior view, of the 
pelvis after a right total hip replacement. There are additional 
significant degenerative changes in the left hip joint, which will 
also need to be replaced. 
Artificial femoral head
Acetabulum

